Interview with Nonvelo Mkhize(CGS)-20260218_125719-Meeting Recording
February 18, 2026, 10:57AM
1h 36m 33s

Molatelo CHOKOE   3:06
CHOKOE.
Good afternoon, miss.

Nomvelo Mkhize   3:14
Good afternoon, ma'am. How are you? Is it CHOKOE?

Molatelo CHOKOE   3:17
I'm dead, don't you?
Yes, it's CHOKOE.

Nomvelo Mkhize   3:21
All right, CSS.

Molatelo CHOKOE   3:24
Thank you for joining. I was just waiting for Dr. Mavuso to join, so.
Just maybe.

Nomvelo Mkhize   3:31
Okay.

Molatelo CHOKOE   3:33
A few minutes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   3:35
Alright, no problem.

Slindo Mavuso   4:26
Hello?
Hello!

Molatelo CHOKOE   4:30
Hi.

Slindo Mavuso   4:31
Hi, can you guys hear me?

Molatelo CHOKOE   4:33
Yes.

Slindo Mavuso   4:35
Hi, Molatelo.

Nomvelo Mkhize   4:39
Hi, Dr. Mavuso, how are you?

Slindo Mavuso   4:41
I'm good, how are you?

Nomvelo Mkhize   4:43
I'm well, thank you.

Slindo Mavuso   4:45
Thank you so much for joining and thanks so much for agreeing. Sorry, it's been such a logistical issue over a lot of the stuff. Yeah, I'm literally, I have an urgent meeting with the department, with the housing department actually just now on wrapping this project up. So this is my, one of my master's students, Ulati, she's been working quite closely with me with the project.

Nomvelo Mkhize   4:52
Ye.
Yes.

Slindo Mavuso   5:09
And I was just going to introduce the two of you and she will probably take over. I've briefed her on everything that she needs to ask and sort of like make the conversation because the conversation, I don't know if you know Tony Abert.

Nomvelo Mkhize   5:16
Yeah.
Yes, yes, I know him.

Slindo Mavuso   5:24
He's, yeah, so he, yeah, so he sort of, yeah, the conversation was kind of based like pivoting from the stuff that he's been telling us. And so he was the one that really insisted that I chat to CGS no matter, you know, like make sure that I chat to you guys. So, but I've briefed that and everything we've been sort of preparing the
strategy document, and it seems like you guys are sort of the most, I would say, the most essential people on the matrix, one of the most essential people on the matrix of everything else. And just moving forward from now, I just would like to just say that if it's okay, I don't know what your sort of like the arrangement is on

Nomvelo Mkhize   5:57
Yes.

Slindo Mavuso   6:06
just having maybe a more direct line with somebody in CGS and maybe if it's even if it's you, that would be great on obtaining just some of the data points that they need for their final report. If it's okay that we kind of have a chat with you, is that okay?

Nomvelo Mkhize   6:24
Yes, so that's fine. But also it would depend the type of data that you are looking for, because some of the data is...

Slindo Mavuso   6:25
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, I think it's...
Yeah, I mean, yeah, I assume that's the case. I mean, but I don't think it's going to be anything intense. They, yeah, I mean, you know, you've dealt with them, so I'm sure I don't have to explain anything to you, but they sort of really also don't know what they want in a way. They, but we know we know what the pillars are, we know what we're looking for, and we know what what what we want to present.

Nomvelo Mkhize   6:42
What?
Okay.

Slindo Mavuso   6:57
So I don't think it'll be anything outside of the ordinary. And I think a few of your colleagues have joined some of the meetings that we had at the end of last year, and they said it would be also just as open. I just was like, yeah, I mean, I just wanted to make sure that it would be easier to just deal with you rather than the problems we've been having trying to even get this interview at this point, because

Nomvelo Mkhize   7:02
Okay.

Slindo Mavuso   7:18
Yeah, yeah, I don't know where we first just went through the direct means, no one said anything. And so finally, when you know, we had to speak to people so that other people, then that then that's probably when you were probably would see, maybe you should take over. So yeah, that's just the context I wanted to sort of give. I have a meeting with them literally in like 15 minutes, because
We want to wrap up the project and the community part of this project hasn't really been done properly, so I need to sort of start coordinating that as quickly. We need to basically come up with a strategy immediately, which would, yeah, which would be, yeah, which probably will take up most of my afternoon. So I'm trying to plan around that.
But I will probably at some point also have a conversation with you, maybe sometime next week if you're free, if that's okay.
We'll both coordinate it eventually.

Nomvelo Mkhize   8:12
Um...
Yeah, yeah, we, yeah, we discussed it. It's fine, but the early next week I'm not available. It could be possible maybe Thursday or Friday. We, yeah, we'll talk about it. It's fine.

Slindo Mavuso   8:15
Yeah, cool.
Yeah.
Okay, well, we'll chat about it. We'll chat about it. Yeah, we'll chat about it. Yeah, let's just keep on chatting through e-mail and then we'll have a conversation. Thank you so much again for availing yourself. Yeah, I mean, I think this will sort of legitimise a lot of the stuff that we really would like to put into the report. And also, please do not hold back.

Nomvelo Mkhize   8:30
Okay.

Slindo Mavuso   8:45
and your criticism of them. I think that's the one thing we really, that I want to sort of articulate in the report that listen, you guys need to be a bit more serious about, as the government about making the stuff, not making an issue of the stuff. If you guys need more funding, mention that if you need more units,
I think it's something that needs to be on the final strategy, on this final strategy document. So don't hold back and obviously it's a confidentiality clause. So you'll just be, it'll be part of the report. It won't say who said what, what came from where, but it will just come out that, yeah, it'll come out, we will articulate all of the points that are very important.

Nomvelo Mkhize   9:25
Okay.

Slindo Mavuso   9:25
Ten.
Thank you. Enjoy. Bye. OK, let's see, let's see, you can take over.

Nomvelo Mkhize   9:29
Thank you.

Molatelo CHOKOE   9:34
Okay, thank you.
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   9:38
Oh, and it's you. I thought it's someone else he's talking about. But it's fine. Okay, that's fine.

Molatelo CHOKOE   9:39
Um, hi.
Yeah.
No, no, it's me.
So I just have questions and then you'll just answer. This is recorded, so everything will go into the report that we are.

Nomvelo Mkhize   9:52
Okay.

Molatelo CHOKOE   9:59
Putting together.

Nomvelo Mkhize   10:00
Mhm.

Molatelo CHOKOE   10:01
So, the first part will be on framing the role of the Council for Geoscience. So, from your vantage point, how would you describe CG?
Ohh.

Nomvelo Mkhize   10:12
Sorry, before you go right into the questions, I just want a brief background. What I know, I just want to make sure that we are aligned. So the work that you are doing, you are interviewing me, which will form part of the strategy document.

Molatelo CHOKOE   10:25
CHOKOE.

Nomvelo Mkhize   10:32
for managing the dolomites hazards within the, is it helping?

Molatelo CHOKOE   10:33
Yes.
Yes, yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   10:41
It's for the provincial.
Who is it for the strategy?

Molatelo CHOKOE   10:45
It's full.
It's full.
Okay, I forgot the full name of that thing, but it's for the housing government, basically. For COGTA.

Nomvelo Mkhize   10:56
Yes.
If because context not everything, it's C.O.G.

Molatelo CHOKOE   11:06
Call.
T.A.

Nomvelo Mkhize   11:14
Oh, cockta, cockta. Oh, okay.

Molatelo CHOKOE   11:16
Means.

Nomvelo Mkhize   11:18
Okay, all right. No, that would be the Department of Corporate Governance and Traditional Affairs. It's Kokta, not Kokta. It's Kokta. All right, that's fine. Okay.

Molatelo CHOKOE   11:25
Yes.
Thank you. Thank you.

Nomvelo Mkhize   11:33
Yes, no, it's fine. You can go ahead again.

Molatelo CHOKOE   11:35
Anything else, or should I continue with the questions?

Nomvelo Mkhize   11:40
Yeah, you can continue, but your line is not the best as well. It keeps cutting a bit, but...

Molatelo CHOKOE   11:46
I'm so sorry. I'm sorry about that. You can just stop me.

Nomvelo Mkhize   11:52
Mhm.

Molatelo CHOKOE   11:53
Than ever.
So, from your vantage point, how do you describe Council for Geosciences' role in the current sinkhole landscape in Houting?

Nomvelo Mkhize   11:55
Okay, perfect.
Okay, so maybe let me start by describing CGS. So CGS1 is a state entity. We report under the Department of Minerals and Petroleum Resources. So we are a geoscience council.
So our responsibility, it solely lies on the rocks, the geoscience, studying the rocks, their behaviours and stuff like that. So we have mapped the Dolomites, that's number one. So within the cancer for geoscience, we've got a unit called infrastructure and land use.

Molatelo CHOKOE   12:39
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   12:44
So that unit is responsible for the hazards that impact on the infrastructure. And it's also responsible for safe development.
So now, as it relates to the symbols, so for example, if someone wants to build in a Dominic area, they are required to conduct a Dominic stability investigation. And that report needs to come to the CGS. So CGS becomes an independent reviewer of

Molatelo CHOKOE   12:57
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   13:17
that report because we do know that the municipalities do not have capacity when it comes to the engineering geology. So we are assisting the municipalities. So that's part of our mandate. To say if you've conducted a Dominic disability investigation, have you complied to the SENS 1936, which is the standard that is being used for development on Dominic land?

Molatelo CHOKOE   13:31
The.

Nomvelo Mkhize   13:42
We also cheque the type of development, if it aligns with the standard to say, okay, you've done the investigation. Did you do the proper investigation? You've done the minimum requirements for the investigation and you've aligned with the standard. And looking at the hazard,

Molatelo CHOKOE   13:43
Mmh.

Nomvelo Mkhize   14:01
that you have unearthed, is it suitable? Is that development, the proposed development suitable for such a hazard? And then after we've done that, after we've done the review process, we then compile a response letter, which will then go to
the municipality, the relevant municipality where the site resides, to say, okay, so and so is planning to develop this type of development and they've appointed an engineer, an engineering geologist to conduct the investigation. These are the findings and
We support, if we support, if they've done everything right, we support the type of development they want to do and the investigation to say they've done it properly, they've complied with the standards and therefore recommend that municipality can proceed then with the approval of that development. But of course, taking into consideration other
aspects. So ours is to look at the geology, to say they've done the proper investigation. And then when it comes to the sinkholes, so you'd know these sinkholes that we are talking about, they happen in Dominic areas. Remember I said we map the geology.

Molatelo CHOKOE   15:13
Mm.
Okay.
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   15:23
So we've mapped the geology where you can find the dolomites and we are conducting a lot of research when it comes to those sinkholes. We have a database which looks at the sinkholes that have been recorded in the country as a whole and also

Molatelo CHOKOE   15:23
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   15:43
We remember, we, I mean, I said the investigations, they come here. So meaning we have records, we have a database and therefore we've got bird's eye view in terms of what is happening in a particular area by looking at the different investigations that have been conducted around that area. And we are doing research to come up with the hazard.
hazard maps to say, okay, in this area, looking at all the data points, the investigations that have been conducted, these are the, this is the hazard that you can anticipate in that area. So I hope that answers your question.

Molatelo CHOKOE   16:23
Yes, yes it does. And then...
Following that question, how has that role?
That the CG that the CGS has evolved over the past decade.
I think you might have covered this.

Nomvelo Mkhize   16:37
Mmh.
Yes, yes, so with with with OK, you can proceed.

Molatelo CHOKOE   16:41
OK, where do you feel?
I was going to move on to the next question because I think you've covered both those questions. So where do you feel Council for Geosciences work is being taken seriously and used effectively?

Nomvelo Mkhize   16:54
Play.
Okay, that's a bit of a difficult one. And again, I'm going to answer in relation to the subject matter that we are talking about. So

Molatelo CHOKOE   17:13
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   17:15
Like I said, what we are doing is part of our mandate. We are mandated to assist the municipalities, the public and the decision makers. But remember, with that is to advise, to assist.

Molatelo CHOKOE   17:21
Mhm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   17:33
So, I mean, if you're offering an advice, the person you are advising, it's either they take it or not. It's up to them. It's entirely up to them. And nothing forces them to take your advice, right? So I'm saying this because we've seen, we've met all the municipalities and the districts that are affected by Dolomite.

Molatelo CHOKOE   17:47
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   17:55
And we do know that not all the municipalities have implemented this, the services that we provide. Some are not enforcing or they don't have it in their bylaws, because what then implements this is
is having it in your bylaws to say, if you are going to develop here, these are the things that, these are the steps that you need to follow. So not all municipalities that are affected by dolomite have implemented this, meaning there are cracks, there are investigations, there are areas where development takes place.
in the investigation, the proper investigations are not conducted because of those gaps. And another thing is that
Okay, let me go back to the question, actually. Your question is, where do we think the role of CJS is being taken seriously?

Molatelo CHOKOE   18:54
Yes, yes, and used effectively.

Nomvelo Mkhize   18:58
and used effectively. So I will quote the city of Twane. City of Twane understand the risk that is associated with a building on Dominic land and therefore they've enforced the CJS rule. And you can see how the risk is being mitigated.

Molatelo CHOKOE   19:02
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   19:19
And another municipality would be Ekuruleni. Ekuruleni have also followed suit. We have a close working relationship with them and we are able to assist them in this respect. Yeah, and few other municipalities. But on the government, maybe provincial government,
And.
point. I think the, like your cocktail, more and more they are engaging us, asking for our assistance, meaning they are beginning to understand that CGS has a role to play in this pandemic that we are facing of sinkholes popping up everywhere.
So yeah, those are the ones that I can quote. I mean, human settlements as well. I don't know if you want me to group them per se, or you just wanted me to highlight #1 one.

Molatelo CHOKOE   20:09
Mm.
I don't really think it matters. Just as long as we understand where it's being taken seriously. So it doesn't matter. Because, yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   20:30
Thank you.

Molatelo CHOKOE   20:33
So the next question then will be, where do you feel it is underutilised or misunderstood?

Nomvelo Mkhize   20:33
Hey.
Okay, underutilized, I would say on a government level, because like I said, we're a state entity, meaning our role is to assist government, mainly, that's our primary role. But you find that

Molatelo CHOKOE   20:59
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   21:01
some government departments, they don't even know, maybe they don't even know that we exist and they go look for these resources somewhere else, you know, when they are confronted with these challenges. So for me, I think on a government scale, different departments,
they should be utilising our resources and our expertise, but you don't really find that happening across board. So I think there's still a gap there and there's a lot that still needs to be done. And I'm not sure whether it is the lack
Of knowledge for the existence of the CGS and the role that CGS plays.
Or these other factors, yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   21:55
Mm.
Okay, so when municipalities approach CGS, what are they looking for? What are they usually looking for exactly? So it could be reassurance, data validation or guidance.

Nomvelo Mkhize   22:11
I mean, it's all of the above. So municipalities, like I said, remember, they do not have, often they lack the expertise to engage with these reports. Sometimes they don't even know that there has to be these reports. So when they are looking to the CJS,

Molatelo CHOKOE   22:27
You?

Nomvelo Mkhize   22:32
They are looking for, excuse me, for assistance. They are looking for guidance. They are looking for the data. You know, when maybe there's a sinkhole, I mean, within the city of Joburg, their first point of contact is CJS because they know that we deal with
you know, geoscience and we are able to guide them, to assist them, to do the investigation and, you know, make sure that the state doesn't end up paying or the municipalities doesn't end up paying exorbitant amounts for something that can be done, you know, by CGS at a far less.
price and sometimes they are looking for reviews, you know, when maybe they've appointed A consultant and they want to make sure that whatever the consultant is giving them is the correct thing. So yeah, that's what they would be looking for.

Molatelo CHOKOE   23:30
Neani.
Okay. So if this strategy that we are working on gets one thing right about geological risk, what should that be?

Nomvelo Mkhize   23:46
Yo, OK, so my understanding of the strategy is...
because we also develop strategies. Dominic risk management strategies is that first and foremost, what it needs to make sure that it takes care of is quantifying the risk.

Molatelo CHOKOE   23:57
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   24:10
as best as it can, because there needs to be an understanding of where the risk is at, which areas are at a higher risk compared to the others. And I feel like once you've quantified, identified the risk,

Molatelo CHOKOE   24:10
Okay.

Nomvelo Mkhize   24:27
then the rest is much easier because what follows after that is monitoring the risk, mitigating the risk from materializing. And I think what I've seen as well is

Molatelo CHOKOE   24:36
Neani.

Nomvelo Mkhize   24:43
As one of the things that result in the risk not, I mean, the strategy not working is the implementation. What about if...
it can make sure that at an implementation level, because someone has to spearhead the implementation of the strategy. And if that person is not clued up in terms of what it means and what it is that they are supposed to be doing and the importance of what,
they are supposed to be doing. I think it's as good as the paper it's written on.
Honestly. So for me, it's two areas. It's the inputs in terms of what informs the strategy, and that is quantifying and correctly identifying the risk. And also on the implementation side, if you've got the right people to implement it and

Molatelo CHOKOE   25:30
Thank you.

Nomvelo Mkhize   25:40
the people know exactly, they have the necessary skills to implement it, I think you would have succeeded.

Molatelo CHOKOE   25:51
So what would worry you if the strategy oversimplified?

Nomvelo Mkhize   25:59
If it's oversimplified, it just, if it's oversimplified, then it's difficult for it to serve the purpose. But at the same time, you don't want to have it too technical as well, because

Molatelo CHOKOE   26:13
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   26:19
It needs to talk to the layman, you know, because there will be, there needs to be, for example, inspectors on the ground. And those people, you can't expect them to be too technical. But yeah, oversimplification of it, then it doesn't, it won't serve the purpose, the intended purpose.

Molatelo CHOKOE   26:24
Ohh.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   26:41
But again, I do appreciate that the scale is also difficult. If you are developing a strategy for a province, it's very tricky because the scale is quite big. And yeah, it will be difficult to make sure that it is
Not simplified.

Molatelo CHOKOE   27:06
Yes. So if you had to explain CGS's contribution to someone outside the technical world, so like treasury or human settlements, how would you frame it?

Nomvelo Mkhize   27:08
Okay.
If I have to, can you please repeat that?

Molatelo CHOKOE   27:24
If you had to explain CGS's contribution to someone outside the technical world, so for example, treasury or human settlements, how do you frame it?

Nomvelo Mkhize   27:37
Okay. Obviously, the Treasury is worried about the money. And they want to know that they won't be fruitless expenditure and they want to know that whatever resources and we know the fiscal is dingling.

Molatelo CHOKOE   27:44
Yeah.
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   27:56
There's not, there's no oversupply, but I think what's more critical for Treasury is...
to make sure, okay, for example, what we have seen is that many municipalities, government departments, they go and appoint consultants to do the investigations. And you find that the reports
from the investigations that would have been done by those consultants. They are not even worth the paper they are written on. But when you look at how much it has been spent.
you find that it's huge amounts that have been spent on that work. And essentially that work does not even, you know, provide solutions. It doesn't even cover what the investigation must be covering for. So for CGS, now coming back to

Molatelo CHOKOE   28:43
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   28:59
The work that CGS does, so CGS.
If I'm explaining to Treasury, ours is to make sure that wherever there is development, that must happen.

Molatelo CHOKOE   29:06
The.

Nomvelo Mkhize   29:15
Any risk that is associated with the ground is clearly understood. And it is also, and measures to mitigate against the risk, I mean, the materialisation of the risk, they are highlighted in the solutions.
And now I'm talking about, for example, for different risk, there's different types of foundations that you'd need to, you know, use to make sure that the risk is covered or you are designing for that particular risk that is on the ground. And obviously being a state entity,
We are, our rates are very low because we are not looking to make profits, but we are looking to cover our expenses, operational expenses. And then for human settlements, fortunately with human settlements, we've got very good relationships.
and we are at a point where we are conducting investigations for human seclements before they do most of the construction that they do. So yeah, I think it applies the same description or
Yeah, explanation applies for human settlements as well. But essentially is to make sure that the state does not end up paying more than what it should. And it is getting what is supposed to be getting as it relates to the investigation and
compliance with the standards that are there for.
Development.

Molatelo CHOKOE   31:06
Okay, thank you. So we're moving on to the second part, which is to understand the provincial risk baseline. So when you step back and look at housing as a whole, how well do we truly understand the spatial distribution of sinkhole risk?

Nomvelo Mkhize   31:23
We don't, to be honest, because we are still at a point where we are reactive in terms of how we are dealing with sinkholes. We are not at a point where we fully understand which areas are of higher risk.
for single development. And when it comes to mitigation measures, oh my goodness, it's so bad. Because once you understand the risk, then you are able to implement mitigation measures directed to those areas that have high risk. So we are not

Molatelo CHOKOE   31:44
Mm.
No.

Nomvelo Mkhize   32:02
We are nowhere close to that point. Where we are is we know areas that are Dominic, and I mean, as...

Molatelo CHOKOE   32:10
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   32:11
As a nation, I'm not even talking about specifically anyone. We just know where Dolomite is. We just know where a sinkhole has happened in the past. But as to understanding the risk for sinkhole, we are too far from that.

Molatelo CHOKOE   32:27
Okay.
Cool.

Nomvelo Mkhize   32:30
Yeah, and I think that's what we are also trying to do. Remember I said we are busy with research and developing hazard maps, which will then assist the municipalities or whoever to say, okay, based on the information, remember a model is as good as the information that you have.

Molatelo CHOKOE   32:40
No.

Nomvelo Mkhize   32:50
So based on the information that we have.

Molatelo CHOKOE   32:51
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   32:54
These are the areas that we deem high hazards. But obviously, the more you get data, and I must say that another biggest challenge is the data, because drilling, again, is not cheap. That's another thing. And there's a lot of non-compliance.

Molatelo CHOKOE   33:11
Neani.

Nomvelo Mkhize   33:14
from the people side. You know, people, for example, if you want to extend your house, legislation says you must investigate before you can extend, but you find people just extending without even complying.
with the bylaws of the city. So yeah, we are too far from understanding the actual risk.

Molatelo CHOKOE   33:35
Mm.
Okay, so the CGS inventory is expensive.
How should we know, how should we think about its strengths?

Nomvelo Mkhize   33:57
Above.

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:00
It's strength.

Nomvelo Mkhize   34:00
How should you know about existence?

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:03
How should we think about the CGS's strength?

Nomvelo Mkhize   34:04
Yeah.
I'm not understanding the question. Maybe repeat it, please.

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:16
So, the Council for Geoscience inventory is extensive.

Nomvelo Mkhize   34:22
OK.

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:22
How should we think about its strengths?

Nomvelo Mkhize   34:27
When you say inventory, what do you mean?

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:28
How's you doing, Miss?
Um...

Nomvelo Mkhize   34:34
You mean the data?

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:35
The whole.
Yeah, the data and everything. I think like everything about the CGS, it covers a lot of things. It's extensive.

Nomvelo Mkhize   34:48
Mhm.
Okay.

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:51
So, as from outside the CGS, how should we think about its strengths?

Nomvelo Mkhize   34:58
Mm.
How should you think about the strength of CJS? Okay. Yes, you are correct. Okay, one thing about...
the CGS, which maybe you will not find somewhere else. Remember I said we've got a database that's number one of all this data. We've got the expectees. And when I say expectees, we've got different expectees in one house. You know, we've got, I mean, for this problem,

Molatelo CHOKOE   35:20
Mm.
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   35:33
There's many expectations that you require. You require engineering geologists, you require geo-hydrologists, structural geologists, geologists themselves, like we've got a wide range of the expertise as it relates to the geology and therefore
which are required for, you know, dealing with this problem, which I think that's something that you won't find anywhere else. And for the fact that our primary mandate is to map, is to research, is to research these geohazards, you know, research these geology, these roads.

Molatelo CHOKOE   36:05
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   36:12
So, and I think that's just the foundation of our strength and the fact that that's unique. What we have is unique. You won't find it anywhere else. And that is part of our mandate. And we are being financed by government to actually do that, this research that we are talking about here.
So it's not about, you know, you get a client there who wants you to assist them in that particular area and that's what you do. But ours is to look on a broad view and scale, not necessarily focusing on a particular area for revenue generation.

Molatelo CHOKOE   36:36
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   36:56
Deposits.
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   36:59
Okay. And then where are its blind spots?

Nomvelo Mkhize   37:06
Your blind spots.
For CGS, okay. So I think the work that we do should essentially be informing policy.
You know.

Molatelo CHOKOE   37:24
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   37:25
Ask me, and I don't think...
Maybe we.
We are necessarily, okay, now I'm talking about as it relates to sinkhole. So, you know, there's universities as well who are doing research on these, on the same subject.

Molatelo CHOKOE   37:47
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   37:48
And I think one of the blind spots is that, you know, there's no collaboration or we are not coming together to, because we're duplicating efforts, to be honest. There's a lot that we can gain from, you know, coming together with all the researchers out there. Because consultants,

Molatelo CHOKOE   38:03
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   38:09
the municipalities, they're not going to do research. They are just going to implement policy. Someone has to do the research and you find that there's universities like yourselves, there's research that you are doing. UP is doing their own research. You know, many universities are doing research on these subjects and you find that there's duplication.

Molatelo CHOKOE   38:13
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   38:29
of effort. And imagine if we could, you know, come together and deal with this problem collectively. So, and also, you know, have someone else focus on something and another person focusing on something, but with the aim of making sure that we resolve this problem.

Molatelo CHOKOE   38:30
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   38:49
as a country. And we also make sure that the policies that we develop, they are scientifically informed as well. And the research that is happening is informing the policy and the implementation.

Molatelo CHOKOE   38:52
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   39:08
I think, for me, that's one of the areas where we are really lacking, and there's a lot that we can do there.

Molatelo CHOKOE   39:19
Yes. Do you feel that current hazard maps are sometimes interpreted as more precise than they really are?

Nomvelo Mkhize   39:31
Ohh.
Well, yes, I think so, but I think that emanates from...
Maybe a lack of understanding and knowledge, because if you are going to take a hazard map and give it to...
A person out there in the streets.
All they see is colours and where they see red.

Molatelo CHOKOE   39:54
Yeah.
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   39:57
They know it's a no-go area, but no, that's not necessarily true.
You see, it just says the hazard or the risk.
or the possibilities of the risk materialising in this area, they are high. But it doesn't really say it's a no-go area. It says if you want to go there, this is what you can do in terms of what you can develop there. And this is what you can do in terms of mitigating against the risk materializing. So

Molatelo CHOKOE   40:13
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   40:29
I think it comes from a lack of understanding.
Maybe they are too technical.

Molatelo CHOKOE   40:37
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   40:39
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   40:39
And then, where is where is uncertainty highest in our provincial model?

Nomvelo Mkhize   40:48
Which model are you talking about?

Molatelo CHOKOE   40:54
Mm.
They didn't specify here on this question, but I'm thinking it's the provincial model that was...
produced by, I'm not sure if the CGS or the government.

Nomvelo Mkhize   41:08
No.
That one, I do not know a model. I don't know which model you are referring to and therefore I cannot answer because for me to know uncertainties within that model, I would need to know the model. So I don't know.

Molatelo CHOKOE   41:23
Yeah, yeah.
That's fine. Are they? Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   41:25
I can answer that one.

Molatelo CHOKOE   41:29
Are there areas that concern you because they are under investigated, politically sensitive or rapidly developing?

Nomvelo Mkhize   41:42
Are there areas that are under that we think they are under investigated?

Molatelo CHOKOE   41:45
That concerned me.
Yes, or they are politically sensitive or rapidly developing.

Nomvelo Mkhize   41:58
Um...
Yo, I can't think of one.
Yeah, no, I can't think of one at the moment.
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   42:15
If we were, if we were building a truly robust provincial disaster risk profile, what geological layers must be non-negotiable?

Nomvelo Mkhize   42:26
Can you please repeat that if we were building?

Molatelo CHOKOE   42:28
If we read.
Right, if we were building a truly robust provincial disaster risk profile, what geological layers must be non-negotiable?

Nomvelo Mkhize   42:43
Ohh.
Yeah, I think the way the question is phrased.
Maybe it's incorrect, 'cause when you say geological layers.
Okay, let me give you what I understand. I think it should have been even broad than just geological, because geological you are limiting it. Because geological, obviously you need to have the geology itself.

Molatelo CHOKOE   42:59
Oh.
CHOKOE.
Okay.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   43:16
you know, and geologically, okay, you need the geology, you need the structural geology, you need the groundwater, you need your aquifers, you know, you need the, but I mean, those are now sort of moving outside the geological layers.

Molatelo CHOKOE   43:24
Mm.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   43:36
You, you need the monitoring of the groundwater; that data must be available.

Molatelo CHOKOE   43:45
The.

Nomvelo Mkhize   43:45
So, okay, as it relates to geology, I think that's where I can pause. But in terms of the other layers, that could be critical if you are developing this kind of a model. You definitely need development because development is a cue, is a major, major factor to this risk.

Molatelo CHOKOE   44:05
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   44:06
You will need to know where your infrastructure is running. And I'm talking about water infrastructure, your sewer, your potable water, you know, you need that. That is key. And of course, development, development also involves houses as well.
You will also need the, you still on the infrastructure, your storm water drainage is because those are the key things. I did talk about groundwater monitoring because another problem is the groundwater obstruction, which is a major issue, particularly in the areas where they are relying on groundwater.

Molatelo CHOKOE   44:28
Yeah.
Mmh.

Nomvelo Mkhize   44:49
they are relying on, I mean, groundwater for consumption or farming purposes. You see, those are the main things that would.
result in or that you need to have when you are developing such a model. And again, it depends on the model. Who is it talking to? Is it talking to you are developing it for
Infrastructure.
Are you developing it for for people? It's just quite broad, but geological layers, I think I did give you. I was just adding these areas and you also need the the the the.

Molatelo CHOKOE   45:33
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   45:41
the existing data. You need areas which have been investigated and the results of those investigations. You need your sinkhole data because you need to know where sinkholes have happened previously.

Molatelo CHOKOE   45:44
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   45:57
So those are the key things that you need to have. And I mean, you also need topography because that's also important. There's just a lot that you need.

Molatelo CHOKOE   46:06
Mm.
If we removed all political pressure and started from scratch, what would be the ideal geological baseline look like? What would the ideal geological baseline look like?

Nomvelo Mkhize   46:25
Be.
Hey, these questions, what, what, who did these questions?

Molatelo CHOKOE   46:33
They were prepared by Doctor Mavuso together with the.
People from Katlego.

Nomvelo Mkhize   46:43
OK, you were to remove political.

Molatelo CHOKOE   46:43
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   46:48
Influence.

Molatelo CHOKOE   46:49
Reza.

Nomvelo Mkhize   46:50
Uh-huh.

Molatelo CHOKOE   46:51
Yes, and from scratch.
What would the ideal geological baseline look like?

Nomvelo Mkhize   46:58
No.
What?

Molatelo CHOKOE   47:08
Ohh.

Nomvelo Mkhize   47:09
The part that throws me off is the geological baseline.
I would understand if maybe...

Molatelo CHOKOE   47:15
Yeah, I also thought...

Nomvelo Mkhize   47:18
Maybe if the question, the intention of the question is to understand, if there's no political, if you were to remove political pressure.
Maybe how would you deal with this problem, you know, without this problem?

Molatelo CHOKOE   47:31
Mm.
I think that's what the question was intending to be.

Nomvelo Mkhize   47:39
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   47:42
Yeah, so I think you can answer it from that point instead of the geological baseline, because I'm also lost on the geological baseline.

Nomvelo Mkhize   47:42
Uhh.
Okay, but if we were to start from scratch, then in trying to resolve this issue, I mean, first and foremost, you need to understand the geology. That's number one. And you need to

Molatelo CHOKOE   48:04
Mhm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   48:08
You need to, government would need to supply funding for SAGE purposes because where we are, we are, like I said previously, we are the sponsors in how we are dealing with this problem. We haven't gotten to a point where we are at the
where we are proactive, because we need to get to a point of monitoring.
We are not there.

Molatelo CHOKOE   48:37
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   48:38
We need to have technologies that would assist to monitor. Like for example, there's an experiment that we are busy with, there's research that we are busy with, where we are doing a sinkhole experiment. You know, trying to understand, how do you trigger a sinkhole?
Once you've put in all the things that are required for a sinkhole to develop, how do you know that the sinkhole is progressively happening? And that progressively happening, it will give you time to say, if you've got monitoring tools, then you have early warning systems.
then it gives time for reaction to say, okay, a sinkhole has started happening there, and therefore you evacuate the area. Or you remove the things that are contributing to the progressive occurrence of the sinkhole to make sure that it stops.

Molatelo CHOKOE   49:30
No.

Nomvelo Mkhize   49:39
So.
I think I digressed a bit. So the main thing would be to understand the geology that we are dealing with, to make sure that development

Molatelo CHOKOE   49:50
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   49:54
is influenced by the science. You don't just see an open space and then you decide to develop an area. You know, like how people are doing, they see an open place and then they think they can go build there.

Molatelo CHOKOE   50:04
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   50:14
You know, and that is just a recipe for disaster. And the third one is research. You know, having enough research happening to make sure that how we're dealing with this problem is proactive rather than reactive.

Molatelo CHOKOE   50:20
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   50:32
Yeah, I think for me.
If we were to start from scratch, those are the things that we would need to do.

Molatelo CHOKOE   50:44
Okay, so now we're going to move to water mining and dynamic change. So...
From your perspective, how much of current instability is geology and how much is hydrology?

Nomvelo Mkhize   51:02
Mm.
Okay, yeah, I know this question.

Molatelo CHOKOE   51:08
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   51:09
Okay, remember for a sinkhole to happen, there has to be water.

Molatelo CHOKOE   51:15
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   51:15
Water is a key, is a critical factor for a sinkhole to happen. It's either you are removing water from the system or you are adding water. Those are the things that result into a sinkhole happening.
So, I mean, all of them are geological because you first need to have a dolomite drug, which we know is soluble when it is put together with water. Where there's water, it becomes soluble and then it results in cavities.
Right. So all of them are geological. But I think maybe the question, what it was trying to ask is how many of them are anthropogenic and how many of them are natural?

Molatelo CHOKOE   51:51
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   52:04
If I have to think about it, because remember, the hydrological, that is water. Hydrological, it's either you are removing water or you are adding water onto the geology on this dolomite, which is already compromised. You see. So maybe the question wants to know how many of the sinkholes can be attributed to man-made?

Molatelo CHOKOE   52:05
Mm.
Neani.
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   52:26
activities or human activities or natural activities. Because even without human intervention, there's still sinkholes that do happen. But majority, the 98% of the, sorry, 95% of them,

Molatelo CHOKOE   52:40
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   52:46
are resulting from human activities. And human activities, it's either there's groundwater abstraction, like I said before, for consumption or for, I mean, for, yes, for consumption or household consumption or farming purposes.

Molatelo CHOKOE   52:51
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   53:02
Or it is poor storm water drainage, because Dominic area has their own one ponding water.

Molatelo CHOKOE   53:07
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   53:13
or it is the leaking pipes from your water infrastructure. So those are the main things that contributes to human induced sinkholes. So 95% of them

Molatelo CHOKOE   53:17
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   53:29
are associated with human activities.
And only 5%, we can say they happen naturally.

Molatelo CHOKOE   53:34
Okay, I think this question...

Nomvelo Mkhize   53:38
Mhm.

Molatelo CHOKOE   53:39
Okay, I think the question was like, yeah, it wanted estimates like of percentages. So I think you answered it properly.

Nomvelo Mkhize   53:48
I.
The.

Molatelo CHOKOE   53:51
Thank you.
And then how do municipal leakage, stormwater concentration and groundwater rebound interact in practice?

Nomvelo Mkhize   54:03
Rebound.

Molatelo CHOKOE   54:06
Mm, groundwater rebound.

Nomvelo Mkhize   54:11
It.
CHOKOE.

Molatelo CHOKOE   54:16
Okay.

Nomvelo Mkhize   54:16
Okay, Ripa, my understanding of groundwater rebound is, you'll tell me if I'm wrong. I think it's talking to...
Groundwater, okay, you know you've got a groundwater level. And seasonally and other factors, it results to fluctuations, right, of the groundwater level. So rebound, I'm suspecting, it refers to

Molatelo CHOKOE   54:32
Yes.
Mm.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   54:46
You know, once it has been lowered, how does it get to the level of recovering to your normal groundwater level?
Is that the correct understanding of groundwater rebound?

Molatelo CHOKOE   55:02
No.

Nomvelo Mkhize   55:03
From this question.

Molatelo CHOKOE   55:05
I think, I think so. I think that's the correct one.
I'm just trying to think about it, so...

Nomvelo Mkhize   55:13
The.
Okay, so it's like crowds are in charge sort of.

Molatelo CHOKOE   55:19
So it's nice.
Yeah, it's the recovery of water table to their natural level.

Nomvelo Mkhize   55:25
Yeah, okay, that's what I said.

Molatelo CHOKOE   55:27
Following following abstraction, yes, so you're right.

Nomvelo Mkhize   55:32
Okay, so the question, yeah, you can go ahead.

Molatelo CHOKOE   55:33
So, how would...
The question is now, how does groundwater rebound, stormwater concentration and municipal leakage interact in practice?

Nomvelo Mkhize   55:50
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   55:54
I see.

Nomvelo Mkhize   55:55
That one would need research because it just depends on the water level in a particular area. And when we are saying storm water,
If the storm water is stagnant, it percolates through the soil. But as to whether it reaches the groundwater level from that percolation, that's a different story. Same as pipe leakages.

Molatelo CHOKOE   56:13
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   56:25
does it get to the groundwater level just depends on how deep the groundwater is. But I think what is more crucial

Molatelo CHOKOE   56:25
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   56:39
Now I'm just, like I did with the previous question, I am just thinking what the person that drafted the questions wanted to ascertain or to get from this question.

Molatelo CHOKOE   56:53
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   56:55
I think they want to know, perhaps, the impact.
Of your leaking water infrastructure and storm water.

Molatelo CHOKOE   57:07
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   57:08
Pointing.
their impact on maybe the sinkhole occurrences. Like I said before, when you've got a leaking pipe, this happens over a period of time. Remember, the pipes are underground. They are buried. It happens over an extended period of time. And

Molatelo CHOKOE   57:10
Yes, yeah.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   57:28
It's very difficult to know that there is a leaking pipe until you see the damp on the ground. You see, and when you see the damp on the ground, you may find that it's been happening for months.

Molatelo CHOKOE   57:36
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   57:42
You see, so what that water does is it percolates through the soil. Remember the Dominic drop, it weathers over time.
And when it weathers, the first step is you are left with low density material, like very soft material, which can easily be washed away by water. So when that happens, the leakages or the percolation of storm water,

Molatelo CHOKOE   57:53
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   58:11
Yeah, storm water. You find that when it percolates, it then washes away this low density material, this loose material, and then it exposes the cavities, irrespective of where it ends up, this water under the ground. So I'm not sure whether

Molatelo CHOKOE   58:25
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   58:31
Like I said, it depends on the groundwater level and also the duration.
of how long it's been happening, because there's layers, I mean, underground. And for it to reach the groundwater, it must move through these layers. And depending on how far the groundwater level is. So then it exposes.

Molatelo CHOKOE   58:38
Mm.
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   58:57
If it washes away this material, it exposes cavities and then now there's nothing holding the hanging wall, the material above, then that results in a
a single formation. But I also did explain how the groundwater obstruction also happens. It's the same. What it does, it, okay, when does water, there's equilibrium, because water fills all the gaps.

Molatelo CHOKOE   59:14
Mm.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   59:29
But the moment you reduce the water level.
Because there's weathered material, there's low density material that will go with water as it goes down. Then that again exposes cavities. Because now there's nothing, there's no more equilibrium, there's nothing holding the material above the new results with the collapse of material into the cavities.
Then on the surface, it is a sinkhole. That's what happens.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:00:01
Hmm.
So, are there feedback loops between these processes that we that we underestimate?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:00:14
Feedback loops.
from the processes that we underestimate.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:00:19
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:00:21
The processes that you are talking about, it's the ones that we started with.
Right, when we started.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:00:26
It's the leakage, the storm water and groundwater rebound.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:00:34
Can you say that again?

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:00:37
Are there feedback loops between these processes that we underestimate? So I think when you are doing research or working on the...
type leakages and stormwater concentration and all those processes. Are there feedback loops that we underestimate?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:01:02
Are your questions, Sham? So, the...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:01:05
I think.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:01:07
Hey, a feedback loops, I'm not sure from who.
Uh, but...
Okay, obviously we underestimate the...
the impact of consistent.
Because what you need is consistency for this to happen. You need the pipe to continually be leaking, right? Same as storm water. You need the storm water to be there for some time, which will then result in the continual percolation of water underground.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:01:32
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:01:43
So, those are the things that perhaps the people on the ground underestimates, because...
They would not understand that if a pipe is leaking for months and months.
the impact of what that water is doing. What it does, it provides water and it's consistent.
And therefore, those are the things that you need, which then results with the same code formation. So those are the things that people underestimate. And I mean, you drive past.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:02:04
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:02:17
a lot of areas where there's just ponding water and it's in Dominic areas.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:02:23
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:02:23
And you find that storm water drainage is maybe are blocked for an extended period of time. And you know it rains. And another thing, most of these thing calls, they actually happen during rainy seasons. And that must tell you something in terms of the correlation.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:02:39
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:02:42
And that also talks to, are we properly managing our storm water?
You see, because it's raining, it means this water, it will pond somewhere and it will stay there until the next rain comes. Continue staying there. You know, you just need a consistent water ponding in a particular area, which is a risky, which has a high hazard.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:02:49
Yes.
Mm.
Yeah.
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:03:09
So, yeah, that's the best I can do with that question.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:03:15
No, it's fine. So in mining affected areas, what keeps you up at night in terms of long-term instability?
So.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:03:27
Okay, so mhm.
You can go ahead.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:03:32
I was just going to say, so when looking back at these questions that we were talking about, the water mining and the change in the groundwater rebound, so now looking at mining in affected areas,

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:03:49
Mhm.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:03:50
What keeps you up at night in terms of the long-term instability?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:03:56
Okay, so the the problem with...
Excuse me, mining areas.
It's a difficult one, and it's a different one.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:04:08
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:04:08
Because...
Well, first and foremost, you know that majority of the mines are closing down now.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:04:17
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:04:17
And when the mind started.
There was.
there was a wave of sinkholes. And that resulted from, you know, they have to pump, they have to pump water out in the operations where they are, in their shafts where they are working.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:04:35
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:04:39
So that lowered the groundwater level, right? And it exposed cavities. And then there were sinkholes. There were a lot of sinkholes at that time. But we got to a point where at least there's, we've reached an equilibrium, you know, that era.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:04:44
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:04:59
has stabilized. So now we have a different, a reverse situation where the mines, when they stop operating, obviously they stop pumping as well, meaning groundwater is rising again.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:05:01
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:05:16
You see, because now they are no longer pumping on a daily basis. So water is just there and it's filling up the mine voids. That's another problem that we are experiencing now. We are experiencing another wave of sinkholes.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:05:17
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:05:34
again. But we are at a point where we are still studying and trying to understand the long-term impact of the groundwater arising due to the due to the thing of stopping the pumping of groundwater. But then there's another issue.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:05:36
Hmm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:05:55
Because now what you are introducing, you're introducing air. Then you have AMD, acid mine drainage. That's acidic, meaning it's going to eat up the rock faster now.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:06:05
Hmm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:06:10
You see, the process which takes thousands of years naturally of the reaction between groundwater and the dolomite rock, now it's been fast-tracked because now this water is acidic.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:06:11
Yes.
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:06:27
So it's creating another problem. But not only that, it's now reactivating falls. There's increased seismicity. So there's just a lot of issues that are coming or that are being introduced by the re-watering of mining areas.
on the stability side of things. Yeah, so those are the things. I mean, the fact that we haven't gotten to a point where we fully understand the impact, I think that for me, it's keeping me awake at night because we just don't know what's next. You know, because the research is ongoing.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:06:49
Mm.
Mm.
Yeah.
So, how confident are we in current groundwater monitoring networks?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:07:15
You 00 confidence.
Zero confidence. Like there is no monitoring that I can tell you, like on record. Because the department that's responsible for groundwater monitoring is the Department of Water and Sanitation. And if you go to the database, you'll find that the boreholes were last monitored in 1996.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:07:28
Mm.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:07:41
1980 what?
There's just no monetary.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:07:45
You.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:07:47
Monitoring is not there. The only thing that's there, Nakona, is very few municipalities is control, groundwater control. And even that, you don't really know what it means because part of the requirement for

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:07:48
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:08:04
for some of the development on Dominic areas, particularly the commercial development, is that there must be, but depending on the risk, again, it depends if the risk is high, there must be demonstration of groundwater control and monitoring. And that's where always there is a problem because no one is monitoring.
No one can commit to say, yes, we are doing the monitoring, or we are going to do the monitoring, because that's the responsibility of the municipality, together with the Department of Health, I mean, of DWS.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:08:33
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:08:43
water and sanitation.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:08:44
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:08:45
But that is just not the monitoring is honestly not happening.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:08:46
Mm.
Okay.
So if groundwater rebound accelerates in certain basins, what scenarios should the province realistically plan for over the next 10 years?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:09:05
Yeah, I think that one have covered it in my previous response. At this point, not much is known.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:09:12
I think so.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:09:13
Not on the stability point of view, we assess, yes, but on the stability point of view, we are suspecting that more sinkholes will come. Because I said, remember, there's acid mine drainage now, which is fast tracking the solidification, I mean, the...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:09:15
Yeah, I think we've covered this.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:09:31
the reaction between dolomites and groundwater. And I think another biggest problem is the decanting of the acid mine drainage.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:09:36
Yes.
Mm.
So if nothing changes in how we manage water infrastructure, what does the geological risk landscape look like in 15 years?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:09:55
So that just says areas of high risk, areas where there's already a risk of a sinkhole, it's just going to happen. It is those sinkholes will materialize. And the areas where the risk is minimal, they may be minimal for now.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:10:10
Neani.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:10:15
But with time.
those areas will also be moving from low to medium risk to high risk. Because remember this water that we are within our infrastructure is not the same as groundwater in terms of the chemicals that are there.
So it introduces again a faster reaction with the ground, I mean with the dolomites. So it won't take as long as it takes naturally for the interaction of groundwater and dolomites. So it just means we are just...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:10:45
And.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:10:55
Fast tracking this process.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:10:58
Mm.
Okay, so we are done with the part of water and mining and dynamic change. So now early detection and monitoring.
The point here that there's strong pressure to promise early warning systems, but we must remain scientifically honest. So in your view, what are realistic early signals of destabilization?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:11:27
destabilisation of what, off the ground or of the research towards early warning?
Systems.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:11:38
And.
Off the ground, yeah, off the ground.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:11:43
What are the early warnings of destabilisation of the ground?
Right? Okay, it's...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:11:49
Mm.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:11:52
Well...
Not so early, unfortunately, because sinkhole formation is very sudden. One minute the ground is level, the next minute there's a sinkhole. In its nature, it suddenly occurs. But obviously it may start with cracking, it may start with...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:12:03
Mmh.
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:12:15
a small subsidence, you see there's, you find that there's now a bit of a subsidence, then you can sort of tell that maybe a sinkhole will occur in this area. It just says there's continual settlement that is happening. But again, depending on

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:12:30
Mhm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:12:35
the understanding of the hazard in that area.
But I will want to emphasise that that is also, I want to emphasise that that is also not an early warning because you don't know how much time you have and usually that happens quite late.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:12:43
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:13:03
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:13:05
Misunderstood as predictive.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:13:09
Sorry.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:13:12
What?
Signals are often misunderstood as predictive.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:13:20
What signals are misunderstood?

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:13:22
Any warning signals.
Yes, as predictive. So what early warning signals could be mistaken to be predictive? I think that's what the question means.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:13:41
Ohh.
Oh no.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:13:45
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:13:48
No, I'm trying to think that maybe what the previous question.
was talking about is early warning system is
Technological or...
any other early warning systems rather than...
The signs on the ground.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:14:15
Okay.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:14:17
Because what we...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:14:18
Yeah, okay, yeah, I think you're right because the next question will be what monitoring tools add predictive value. So I think you're right.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:14:20
Yeah, this question.
Mm.
Okay, let's then maybe go back to the previous question.
So that we are anxiety.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:14:40
Yes.
The previous question says...
Yeah.
Do you think it is like a technological thing? I think so, because the other...

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:14:51
Hang on.
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:14:57
raise the risk of technological overconfidence. Okay, so I'll move back to the previous question. In your view, what are realistic early signals of destabilization?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:15:10
And.
So, I...
Like I said, we are busy with research that we, we call it sinkhole experiment. So what we are trying to get to is to understand the process of the sinkhole formation and be able to understand what sort of
Tools can be used to monitor the sinkhole occurrence, and therefore have early warning systems.
which will then implement. So at this point, we don't have any warning systems.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:15:45
Mm.
The.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:15:50
In this country, we don't hate them, but there's quite a number of tools that we have explored.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:15:54
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:15:57
We've explored INSA data, that is satellite imagery. There is also fibre optics. There is also seismic equipment.
That can be used to monitor the single occurrences, so INSA is very expensive, so it's not practical.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:16:14
Mm.
In.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:16:23
to use it for monitoring the sinkholes. And it's quite large in terms of the data. Fibre optics. Fibre optics are fairly cheaper.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:16:33
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:16:40
But we know the challenges that we have as a country when it comes to fibre or, you know, with security concerns that are there. And another problem is scalability. It's scalability. But first and foremost, you need to understand the risk profile. And you can't put it any.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:16:46
Yes.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:17:00
Anywhere and everywhere.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:17:00
Mm.
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:17:02
I said the third one is now I've lost my trail of thoughts.
Okay, I'll go back. Using seismographs, because seismographs, what they do, they listen to the ground. Any shaking that happens, they are able to pick it up in reports.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:17:11
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:17:26
So those are the technologies that we know of that are being explored and other geophysical tools which we are intending on researching them next financial year.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:17:27
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:17:44
So there's no answer to your question, because at this point, we don't have monitoring tools that are there.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:17:44
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:17:53
which we can say we've researched and we are implementing.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:17:54
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:17:59
You get me.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:18:00
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:18:01
The end.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:18:02
Yes, I think, because we have to, this thing says we must remain scientifically honest, so yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:18:10
Mmh.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:18:11
Yeah, I get you.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:18:14
Yes, so the next question.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:18:14
And then what signals are often misunderstood and predictive?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:18:22
Even that one, we are not there because we are not on the predictive yet. We are still trying to research. And after researching, once we have answers, then we'll implement and whatever that we will end up with, that will be then

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:18:30
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:18:40
And.
Oh, okay, predictive.
Okay, so predictive.
Not necessarily sinkhole predictive. It's difficult to predict a sinkhole, but it is what we do is profile the risk to say, okay, here, there is a high potential of a risk forming, but we don't know when or if it will ever.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:18:56
Neani.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:19:09
Hip in.
Depending on whether the measures of mitigating are there or not.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:19:11
Mm.
I.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:19:18
So...
Maybe to answer the question, what is usually mistaken?
As A predictive tool.
I, I don't think we are the 8th.
I will not date.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:19:42
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:19:44
Okay.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:19:44
In what monitoring tools add genuinely add?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:19:46
Wait, wait, okay. Maybe, sorry, can I just, can I just go back a bit? So what I think then would be...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:19:53
Okay.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:19:55
What I think then would be an error in prediction. Remember I said we are not really predicting, but we are doing the risk profile. So if that risk profile is done incorrectly,
But again, it depends on the data, the availability of data, which then informs the risk profile. So you find that in areas where there's less data, then there's extrapolation.
You see, so, and another thing about the Dolomite rock profile is that it's not homogeneous.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:20:25
Mm mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:20:34
It changes quite a lot in such a short space.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:20:35
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:20:40
So I guess what would be a misinterpretation is those extrapolation, because even errors that have less data, you still need to have some form of, you know, a risk profile. So if...
then there's shortage of data, then you extrapolate, then you can sort of demand the area high risk, whereas maybe it's not so much of a high risk. So that's what I think that could be, you know, the misinterpretation.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:21:13
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:21:16
Of the predictive measures.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:21:18
Okay.
And then what monitoring tools genuinely add predictive value?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:21:26
We are not there yet. I've listed the tools that we are currently exploring.
So we are not there yet. We are still searching them. We are still trying to find a good tool. We are still trying to find a cost-effective tool. We are still trying to find a tool that will be scalable.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:21:34
Mm.
Mhm.
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:21:49
Yeah.
So, then, just take.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:21:53
Where is the risk of technology?
Okay, where is the risk of technological overconfidence?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:22:05
That is of technological overconfidence.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:22:10
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:22:12
Hey, I know I think these questions are for...
They are assuming that we already have this technology.
Well, I mean, I will answer generally, so I will my answer would be very general, because...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:22:24
Yes, I.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:22:32
You know, with...
whatever tool that we are going to end up with, obviously we are going to implement your AI for the data analysis, right? Which will give us some, you know, some efficiency.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:22:46
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:22:53
In terms of, you know, the analysis of the data, in terms of how quick...
The data can be analyzed, but at the end of the day, you can't rely on technology. You will still need.
People who are going to look at whatever model or whatever tool you are.
you are dealing with and if we are going to rely solely on the tool and your embedded AI or machine learning or whatever.
then I think that way we can then lose the plots in my understanding. But the question, there is no answer at this point because we are not there yet. We are still on the developmental stage.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:23:46
Mm.
What is the minimum threshold at which monitoring becomes meaningful rather than symbolic?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:23:56
I don't know.
I don't have an answer for that question. I think this technology questions.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:24:02
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:24:04
I don't know who they are for.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:24:05
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:24:07
Buds.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:24:09
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:24:11
Not for this interview.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:24:13
Mm.
And then how should uncertainty be communicated?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:24:21
Uncertainty of words.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:24:21
Speak about any warning.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:24:26
Uncertainty for what?

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:24:28
Um...
When we speak about any warning.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:24:35
MPHELA.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:24:35
How should it be communicated?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:24:40
I think it's, for me, it would be on the level of confidence.
I think it needs to be clear when there's communication, like when we...
predicting or when we are providing warnings, there needs to be one disclaimers. That's #1, so that whoever that's receiving the early warning, they know exactly the limitations.
And also the confidence levels of the early warnings must be attached to the warning to say the probability maybe of, it's just an example, the probability of this thing happening next week, they are maybe 50%.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:25:13
Mhm.
Okay.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:25:30
You know, or how confident are we with this warning that we are issuing?
So I think that's how it should it should be communicated when we are at that point.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:25:38
Mm.
So if you were designing a minimum viable provincial monitoring system, what would it include and what would you explicitly exclude?

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:25:57
How many questions remaining?

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:26:01
I think you can just answer briefly because yeah, I cannot count how many is remaining. There are still many.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:26:11
Hi, this meeting is 1 1/2 hour, and we've done one hour, twenty-eight minutes.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:26:13
So...
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:26:20
I don't think we'll be able to finish 'cause I've got other commitments after this, so...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:26:22
Mm.
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:26:28
Well, to answer the question, what are the key things that would need to be included when designing the early warning system? And what are the things that should be excluded? Right? That's the question.
Is that the question?

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:26:47
Yes, yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:26:52
Ohh.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:26:52
S.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:26:55
Hey.
Okay.
I'm just not sure how I should answer it or the angle I should use in answering it. I'm not sure if it's looking at the process point of view or it's looking at the scientific point of view.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:27:13
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:27:18
You see, because I will give you the scientific point of view.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:27:20
No.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:27:22
which is different from the process point of view. Because for a process point of view, then you need to figure out a process, a procedure in terms of

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:27:26
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:27:35
How is this going to happen? OK, you've developed, you have a monitoring system in place, and what are the key things that must happen?
from the process, but let me give you the scientific point of view. Okay, for the monitoring, first and foremost, obviously you're not going to monitor everywhere.
Because one, that's expensive and two, it's not necessary.
So the first step is understanding the risk profile of the entire Dominic areas. So understanding that this is where the risk is higher and therefore decide on

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:28:04
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:28:18
what areas you need to monitor. But obviously, you're monitoring.
Must be accompanied by your strategy, your management strategies.
Because you've identified that there's a high risk here. And therefore, you must put in measures in place to make sure that the mitigation measures are there. Then you monitor.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:28:45
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:28:46
whatever tool that you decide to use for monitoring purposes.
Obviously, there's technical things that it will come with in terms of your early warning system. You need a system that must be in place. And there needs to be an understanding of if it picks up.
a risk or something that is brewing, what must happen? Who must do what? The system must, what is it that it must do? So those are the things that must be in place. And then the things that would need to be excluded, I think I've said it, I would say you, I mean, there's no need to monitor.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:29:19
Yes.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:29:31
everywhere. Certain areas you need not to monitor them and it's critical that the relevant tool and the relevant people

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:29:34
Mm.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:29:43
A within the value chain.
Yeah, I'm not sure if I covered the second one, but yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:29:49
Ohh.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:29:55
So I gave you on the scientific point of view.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:29:56
Okay, thank you so much.
Yes, yes, you did.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:30:03
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:30:03
So, I don't know how much time you have left, but it's okay if we can cut it.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:30:04
Oh.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:30:11
So that you can...
Yeah.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:30:17
So, what's gonna happen?

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:30:17
I think this can work.
Of.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:30:19
Okay, alternatively, you can send me the rest so that, I mean, does it have to be an interview?

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:30:24
Okay, I, I don't mind to.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:30:29
So, when I have time, I can just...

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:30:30
It doesn't really have to be.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:30:33
Mhm.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:30:34
Right.
Dan.
Okay.
It doesn't really have to be a serious interview like this. It just had to be, I just had to communicate with you.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:30:48
Oh, okay.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:30:49
Mine, it was for Doctor Mavuso, so that's why most of the questions are not really.
understanding because it was not, yeah, mine. But it's fine because now you don't have time. I can send you the questions and then you can respond when you have time.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:31:05
Yeah, I think that's the best way to proceed.
And when, by when do you need the resources?

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:31:11
Yes.
It doesn't matter.
Your convenience.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:31:23
Okay.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:31:24
Hands first, so it doesn't really know whenever you have time, it's fine, maybe.
Day tomorrow, I don't know.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:31:32
A model.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:31:33
You've helped us already enough, so I don't want to come in your schedule and take more of your time.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:31:37
Yeah.
Okay. No, it's fine. e-mail them. I will see when I can be able to.
populate those that I can populate.
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:31:56
Okay.
Ohh.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:31:58
Okay.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:32:01
I'm not sure if I have your e-mail. I'll just...
admin person who is working on this to forward me your e-mail and then I'll do that.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:32:13
Or I can just let me, I can type my e-mail address.
To make it easy for you.
Unless if that's the process, that's the process you must take.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:32:23
Okay.
Thank you. No, it doesn't.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:32:28
The one.
OK, and at geoscience.org.z. Yeah, we can just send them there.
When I get time, I can, you said it's a lot, there's a lot more remaining.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:32:46
Neani.
I mean, not a lot, lot, but they could take the next 45 to 50 minutes. So, yeah, it's already late, I think.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:32:58
And.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:33:00
Because I think this interview was supposed to just be an hour and it took more than that. So I don't want to inconvenience you.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:33:01
No.
Okay, no, that's fine. Please share them and then we'll take it from there.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:33:19
Okay, thank you so much.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:33:22
All right, all the best.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:33:25
Thank you.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:33:27
Shop by.

Molatelo CHOKOE   1:33:28
Have a great day. Bye.

Nomvelo Mkhize   1:33:31
Thanks, you too, bye.

Molatelo CHOKOE stopped transcription
