Provincial Dolomite Risk Preparedness Strategy Interview with Ilse Kleinhans-20260203_115453UTC-Meeting Recording
February 3, 2026, 11:54AM
46m 38s

Molatelo CHOKOE   5:45
Good afternoon, Doctor Lane.

Ilse Kleinhans   5:48
Hi, hello. Is it Molatelo?

Molatelo CHOKOE   5:53
Yes, he is.

Ilse Kleinhans   5:55
How are you?

Molatelo CHOKOE   5:55
Thank you. I'm good, thank you. How are you?

Ilse Kleinhans   5:59
I can't complain.

Molatelo CHOKOE   6:02
Thank you so much for joining.

Ilse Kleinhans   6:05
The pleasure.

Molatelo CHOKOE   6:08
So I will be just asking you a few questions on...

Ilse Kleinhans   6:13
I.

Molatelo CHOKOE   6:14
geophysics, geological modeling.
uncertainty and integration into long-term sinkhole risk management.

Ilse Kleinhans   6:23
Good percent.

Molatelo CHOKOE   6:26
Pardon.

Ilse Kleinhans   6:28
I said 100%.

Molatelo CHOKOE   6:31
So this project is trying to understand sinkhole and subsidence risk over a long time frame, including post-mining and infrastructure-driven change. So the interview will focus on how geophysical investigations actually work on the ground, where they succeed and where their limits matter for planning and disaster management.
And also just to give you a safe space to articulate the issue you see around making an effective strategy to address this. So you're one of the key experts who's always on the ground. So we'll make sure your insights are emphasised in the final report and the recommendations.

Ilse Kleinhans   7:11
Yes, that's correct.

Molatelo CHOKOE   7:15
So from your perspective, what is most commonly misunderstood by non-specialists about your physical investigations for sinkholes and subsidence?

Ilse Kleinhans   7:27
It's, yeah, if you don't have a physical background, a lot of people might think some of the, let's say, quicker and cheaper methods might be applicable, which is not always the case.
So it's always advised to rather, if you don't have a geophysical background, that you discuss it with a geophysicist to see what is the best methodology to go forward. But in general, looking at Dominic related features, we
As a standard practice, use gravity, the gravity method, which is the density measurement, because it gives you a good bedrock profile indication, but you still need to prove drill to see what is going on. Because as you know, cost is very unpredictable, so you need to confirm
and then do a recalculation of the gravity data in order to get the correct residual gravity map. Another method that's very good to use that we start looking at is resistivity or ERI. I've used it in a number of

Molatelo CHOKOE   8:45
Please.

Ilse Kleinhans   8:46
instances and but normally in association with the gravity, because then you can do correlation between the data set because your resistivity is giving you obviously a vertical cross section of your conditions. So with your gravity and if your drilling is, you know, you can
can then have a much better picture of what's going on below the ground. So that's my preferred methods of looking at sinkholes. As said, we normally use only gravity because the ERI is quite expensive, but in some instances it's worth

Molatelo CHOKOE   9:20
S.

Ilse Kleinhans   9:29
to use it. You know, you've got a very deep profile, for example, then I would recommend that you do that also in association with the gravity.

Molatelo CHOKOE   9:43
Okay, thank you. So based on your experience, where do expectations of geophysics most often exceed what the methods can realistically deliver?

Ilse Kleinhans   9:53
Saige.

Molatelo CHOKOE   9:55
Based on your experience, where do expectations of geophysics most often exceed what the methods can realistically deliver?

Ilse Kleinhans   10:06
Once again, it depends on what method you are using. So, yeah, so for example, so let's go for ground penetration radar. A lot of the people would say, you know, you can see 20 metres deep with it, for example, and that's not the case.

Molatelo CHOKOE   10:18
Mhm.

Ilse Kleinhans   10:26
as well as you need to know your profile, as you know, certain soil layers might impact negatively on it and reduce the depth of impact. So it's
What is outfit?
Tars and what can be achieved with certain methods? Yeah, it's not possible, so, but again, you need to have that background to understand it, and if people buy into it, unfortunately.

Molatelo CHOKOE   10:53
CHOKOE.
Okay, so the next question will be, in practice, how important is it to distinguish sinkholes from subsidence when designing investigations and managing risk?

Ilse Kleinhans   11:10
In my opinion, that both important in the same on the same level. It's just in the impact of it. You know, a single is something that happens suddenly, so you can get loss of life, obviously, and you don't know.
you know, when it's going to happen. While with a subsidence, it's gradually growing horizontally. So your centre part might be stable, but on the sides, you know, it can become bigger, again, can impact on infrastructure, typically a shallower feature.
but your impact in terms of remediation might be the sum or even more, because you need to determine what caused it, especially when you start looking at paleosinkholes, which are features that it was a sinkhole millions of years ago, and it felt back in.

Molatelo CHOKOE   11:57
Yeah.
Yes.

Ilse Kleinhans   12:10
but it's very loose material. So your impact in terms of remediation can be more expensive because it's typically a very deep feature. While your sinkhole, you know, depending on which area you're in, might be very shallow and it might be a cheaper method of rehabilitation to fix the sinkhole.
But at this time, it's your.

Molatelo CHOKOE   12:35
Okay, so do you find that subsidence is often under-recognized as a precursor or warning phase rather than treated as a hazard in its own right?

Ilse Kleinhans   12:46
Look, we treat it as the same. You know, working in Dominic, we will treat it in the same manner because on your subsidences, what can happen, especially in your periphery of your subsidence, as I said, it can grow horizontally. You can start getting satellite sink holes.
So it starts opening up, the crack is start opening up and it start forming actually a sink hole, you know, as material consolidates that within the subsidence area on the periphery. So you can get the both of them. So it is a precursor of something possibly bigger.
Once again, depending on what area you are, if you are on the waist rent, I will say, yeah, you need to be careful. This can be a very big thing because you typically get very large singles on the waist rent.

Molatelo CHOKOE   13:40
Oh, okay. And then how does this distinction affect monitoring and response timeframes?

Ilse Kleinhans   13:49
The monitoring will be the same. It depends on, you know, if you've got infrastructure. Typically, you can do precise levelling, you know, over a period of time to see, you know, is it moving? If it suddenly moves, you start moving faster, then you say,
OK, you now evacuate. Now it's time to come in and do something about it, but it can be monitored.
for a while. But as it's all about the infrastructure that you need to protect. So, you know, some areas I say, oh, yeah, just demolish everything. But when you need to protect infrastructure, obviously, you need to do monitoring and in general, even before, during and off.
Yeah.

Molatelo CHOKOE   14:39
Okay, thinking. Are they governance or funding blind spots because subsidence appears less dramatic than sinkholes?

Ilse Kleinhans   14:49
I said some of them, yeah, it is expensive. It's very expensive. It's not cheap. And you know, we've got different methods of how we rehabilitate these things. But yeah, if you've got a deep feature, it's going to be very expensive because obviously you can't just go in with an excavator, then you start looking at grouting.
But you normally will look all of the at the very.
various options and work out what is going to be the cheapest to remediate. But I had with subsidences, most of the times the subsidences was more expensive than the single rehabilitation, but it was poly a feature, so it was very, very...
edit features. So for those who are unfortunately, if you don't treat it correctly, they will come back because there can be a reoccurrence if you don't do the remediation deep enough.

Molatelo CHOKOE   15:50
Okay, so on your presentation for the Engineering Geophysics Symposium,

Ilse Kleinhans   15:57
Mm.

Molatelo CHOKOE   15:59
You spoke about the geological model. And so your evaluation framework highlights blanketing layers, dolomite, bedrock morphology, cavities, and groundwater behavior. So which of these is most often poorly constrained in real projects?

Ilse Kleinhans   16:03
Is.
Yeah.
Look, we need to look at all of them because I said, you know, if you look, so for instance, at, okay, let's get first how we get to that model. You need to investigate. So that's where your geophysics are coming in, your drilling are coming in. In a shallow environment, you might use, for example, an excavator to open to see where the erosion tunnel is, where is the cavity.
But from that data, and it depends on the quality of your data. So you just can drill now 4 barrels versus say 16 barrels around the sinkhole. Your 16 barrels will obviously give you a more accurate presentation of your subsurface conditions.
And depending, so the different factors that we look at or criteria we look at bedrock, as said, if you've got a very deep bedrock environment, possibility of large to very large size singles, all depending on what is above the bedrock, shallow
bedrock, you might get smaller size sinkholes. Then in terms of your blanketing layer, that is what's on top of the dolomite, so that will be your transported soils, your chert residuum, your dolomite residuum of which the what, I presume you've heard of the word what. Those ones are, they are highly erodible and compressible.
So if they get in touch with water, they just, you know, it's like coffee, the roads. So typically that's where we find the voids, where the problem's starting. And so all of that place are our place where your groundwater level is sitting. So say your groundwater level is above that.
problematic what it might stay stable, but as soon as you change equilibrium and you open upside voids within the what or cavities in depth in bedrock, you open a receptacle that can accommodate material from above. That obviously needs a trigger.
are all man-made. It is leaking services, poorly backfill trenches, you know, infrastructure that's not kept in mint condition. So all of that triggers. So you need to have ingress of water or the other
one is groundwater drawdown. That's in your more in your mining areas or farmland areas, where the groundwater level is drawn down considerably, opening up these cavities. Once again, that can mobilise the material from above. So, yeah, that's the way we look at it. But I thought first the geological model
on all my data points, taking them in consideration, where's my groundwater level? What was the trigger? So you need to determine what is the trigger. And then also where is the cavity? How big is the cavity? So all of that we take into consideration.
or I take into consideration when I do this modelling to see how far it is, because a lot of people, sorry, a lot of people think with a single is located, that's where the problem is, but that is not the case. That single is interconnected with the erosion tunnel.

Molatelo CHOKOE   19:29
Okay.
Yeah.

Ilse Kleinhans   19:44
That's once again then connected with a cavity and you need to determine where the cavity is in order to remediate or know where you must go in terms of.
Remediation.

Molatelo CHOKOE   20:00
Okay, so I think that covers the next question I was going to ask. How frequently do you see ingress water and groundwater drawdown acting together rather than as isolated triggers?

Ilse Kleinhans   20:13
It's mostly ingress of water because of our developments. You know, I mean, there is so much development. There's few places of drawdown, which is like your Babsundan area, Dalmars area, for example, and then obviously your mining areas. As you know, Slindo started
to appear with strand when I started with mining, but I mean mining is start slowing down in that area now, so there is a rise in groundwater levels, but you can get again with increase of water also sink hole formation because you change the stresses in soil. So that can also activate sink holes.
I haven't seen that situation yet, but most of the cases it's ingress of water. So, yeah, it's only farmlands and mining we see really groundwater related.

Molatelo CHOKOE   21:07
Okay. And then how confident can we be in static groundwater levels when risk evolves dynamically?

Ilse Kleinhans   21:08
Thank you.
Oh, it's when I was the consultant for Ecolini, we developed the groundwater monitoring programme for them, where we drilled quite a large number of groundwater burrels that's monitored like, you know, on a monthly or quarterly basis.
So you need long time data in order to know what your historical groundwater levels is and your fluctuation, because you obviously get a fluctuation from winter to summer, you know, with the increase in then and lowering again. But
That's the only way you can really know you got correct groundwater levels. Otherwise...
Yeah, it's a thumbs up sort of thing. And if you go and look at the water phase database, because unfortunately they stopped, you know, measuring the groundwater levels. All of those were before available, but yeah, they unfortunately don't measure any more. So yeah, if you're in a specific area,
And the east side, for example, a shallow groundwater level, it's always advised to do, to drill, say, two or three groundwater monitoring holes. And you measure the groundwater levels, then either the owner or the engineering geologists are coming in and monitoring groundwater levels.
to ensure you got the correct data.

Molatelo CHOKOE   22:50
Okay, in mining affected areas, how does this legacy groundwater change complicate this model?

Ilse Kleinhans   22:58
Yeah, massively, because obviously the gold is below the dolomite that they mine. So they draw down the groundwater completely out of the dolomites. But I know the mines in general got a groundwater monitoring program. I know in the West Run specifically.
certain minds got that data. But but yeah, it's not it's not something, you know, they will not going to say. It's a bit, they hold information back a bit. So you're not always.

Molatelo CHOKOE   23:34
Yeah.

Ilse Kleinhans   23:35
that access to that information. Exact like that to know if if your what what is the variation in the groundwater or when they pumping, you know, it's unfortunate that it's not available. Except if the mine is giving you that data, but
Yeah, I can't think that will easily do that.

Molatelo CHOKOE   24:00
Okay, so from the slides on the symposium, on method selection and scale, so gravity surveys are clearly central in your work. What are they exceptionally good at and where are they most often misapplied?

Ilse Kleinhans   24:05
Yeah.
Side game.

Molatelo CHOKOE   24:19
Gravity surveys, they are central in your work. So what are they exceptionally good at, and where are they most often misapplied?

Ilse Kleinhans   24:21
Yes.
Look, like I say, if you understand gravity, you're going to understand your own way what you're looking at. So I've done quite a number of, you talk now in relation to syncos and subsidences, Neani. Am I right?

Molatelo CHOKOE   24:48
Yes.

Ilse Kleinhans   24:50
Okay, so the big thing is your spacing. So you must know typically what you can expect in terms of your geological profile. So for example, you've got a very deep profile. You know, it's not going to help you go
Okay, I can't say that. Let's start with a shallow one. Say you've got a shallow bedrock environment. Now you're going to do a normal like 10 metre or 50 metre grid spacing. You're not going to pick up your grikes and throws, which is narrow slotted areas within the bedrock. You're not going to pick it up. You need the smaller space.
in order to pick those features up. While on a much deeper environment, you can go for, say, the grid spacing, because it's a big feature, it will be big. You will pick up all the features below ground that will be reflected as anomalies.

Molatelo CHOKOE   25:37
Oh.

Ilse Kleinhans   25:49
that you eventually will draw and confirm your conditions. So that's the one mistake a lot of people might is that will just answer, let's do just a 20 metre grid spicing. And that will be sufficient. You can't miss certain structural geological features.
but by doing it on a too larger scale. So you need to know your environment you're working in.

Molatelo CHOKOE   26:17
Okay, so on grid spacing, right, your slides show how it fundamentally controls what can be detected. So how often do budget or programme constraints for grid spacings that are scientifically inadequate?

Ilse Kleinhans   26:36
Look, I'm not willing to do work where I'm not allowed to do it in the way I want to do it. Then you need to rather walk away. You get what I'm saying? Because it is unfortunately expensive, but if it comes to sinkholes and subsidences, which is life threatening,

Molatelo CHOKOE   26:45
Okay.

Ilse Kleinhans   26:57
you know, they're willing to pay it because they realise what you're trying to achieve here. And it's a small amount versus what remediation, the remediation cost is. So I never had we.

Molatelo CHOKOE   27:01
Okay.
Yeah.

Ilse Kleinhans   27:15
I was refused to do it in the manner that I wanted to do it.

Molatelo CHOKOE   27:17
Yeah.
OK, and then what risk arise when shallow narrow features fall below the resolution of standard grades?

Ilse Kleinhans   27:30
Just expand a bit more. How do I characterise Shala?

Molatelo CHOKOE   27:36
What risks arise when shallow, narrow features fall below the resolution of standard grades?

Ilse Kleinhans   27:44
Um...
Yeah, you're going to miss them and you will miss, you know, the drilling them. So you're going to completely miss that feature. And that might be interconnected with a cavity at Dave.

Molatelo CHOKOE   27:58
Okay, how should uncertainty from grid spacing be explicitly communicated to decision makers?

Ilse Kleinhans   28:07
Yeah, it's normally not because it's a scientific field.
It's only if the clients say, well, I mean, yeah, this is very expensive. Then you need to start to explain why you need to do it in that specific manner on a smaller grid spacing. But you can get challenges. But like I said, it is expensive. The smaller your grid spacing, the more expensive it's going to become. But it also depends on your area.
Obviously, your sinkholes and subsidences are not this massive 5 acre size areas. It's much smaller areas. So yeah, that's it's more where you've got very large sites where you've got the enormous increase in costs.
But it's not so expensive, my opinion, you know, for what you achieve from it.

Molatelo CHOKOE   29:02
Okay, so in your experience, when does the addition of ERI, seismic, EMOGPR meaningfully change interpretation rather than simply add complexity?

Ilse Kleinhans   29:16
It's where you especially got like, you know, a **** or a geological contact going through or still, for example, then it contributes because, you know, ERI, EM, for example, specifically, or specifically EM is for vertical to subvertical structures to pick that up.
Magnetic, the same. It's to use, you know, to pick up that structures or features, because sink holes can form also on, you know, *****, the contacts of that or on fault zones. You can even pick up fault zones with that. That's when I start, you know,
using that as well when we got a deep profile. We had, for example, that one that I presented, one of those, or 50, a number of people could not reach bedrock. There were three people before me investigating that thing and I couldn't reach bedrock. So that's when we brought in EM because
of the dolorite cell that was sitting on top. And you need to get through that thing. So you need that cross-section profile. And that's where I will additionally do these investigations. Like I said, I know there's sort of some sort of lineament feature that's related to the sinkhole formation. And you need to understand the extent of
That liniment feature.

Molatelo CHOKOE   30:40
Okay, are there situations where adding more methods can actually increase interpretive risk?

Ilse Kleinhans   30:48
I've noticed that seismics before, but it was it was in a deep environment. It was in a area, but it was not so successful, but it it it's it there is room for it, but it is very expensive. That's one of the most expensive methods is seismic.

Molatelo CHOKOE   30:50
Yes.

Ilse Kleinhans   31:09
So you will obviously start first with things that you know that's going to add value, like your gravity, and then you can consider additional, you know, methods with that. If you, as I said, you want to look at specific features, because seismics more look at your

Molatelo CHOKOE   31:21
Yeah.

Ilse Kleinhans   31:29
Dave to bedrock, so there it adds value, but I said, you know, in environment that we worked in, it didn't add value when we tested it.

Molatelo CHOKOE   31:41
Okay. So what are the most common failure points between geophysical anomaly identification and drilling or trench verification?

Ilse Kleinhans   31:53
With A trench, in my opinion, you can, but you can only do trenches like in a shallow environment because, you know, you can see where it's going into bedrock and obviously it must be in a ridge. So you can still go down to like, say, 12 metres with the excavator. There is cases where we even went down like 18 metres at one sinkhole.
But in terms of the drilling, it's how you interpreted the data and that's where your experience is coming in. As an engineering geologist or as a Dominic slash single specialist, I know what to look for and we are, I assume, the cavity might sit.
So that all comes with experience.

Molatelo CHOKOE   32:37
Okay. How often does drilling contradict the initial geophysical interpretation and how is that handheld in practice?

Ilse Kleinhans   32:47
It is, it depends. Okay, say for example, in a shallow environment, you can get, as you know, of course, it's, you know, it's not a straight line. So you can get like pinnacles that could be missed, a Dominic or a pinnacle that's coming up.
And then now suddenly you get this, you know, one metre say rock and then one metre away you drill and then you go down to 60 meters. So those small pinnacles can sometimes be missed by geophysics. That they can't pick it up. So that's the only job.
things that can vary from, if you did a good gravity survey or something else with it, but in general, yeah, flatters and your pinnacles are the things that can be a bit different from what you anticipated.

Molatelo CHOKOE   33:42
Mmh.
Okay, is there sufficient space in current projects for iterative model revision or is the process too linear?

Ilse Kleinhans   33:54
In my opinion, there's enough spice to do it.
It takes a bit of time, but yeah, as long as your budget makes provision for it, I mean, that's the most important is the analysis of your data to ensure you come up with the right plan.

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:07
Yeah.
Okay, and then who is who typically owns the geological model as it evolves?

Ilse Kleinhans   34:22
How do you mean?

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:26
Um...

Ilse Kleinhans   34:28
Typically, it will be the client whose data it is.

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:32
Ohh, okay, okay.
Yeah, it.

Ilse Kleinhans   34:36
Because I fight for it.

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:41
And then how should geophysical outputs be translated into planning scale hazard information without creating false certainty?

Ilse Kleinhans   34:50
Doing to create.

Molatelo CHOKOE   34:53
How should geophysical outputs be translated into planning scale hazard information without creating false certainty?

Ilse Kleinhans   35:04
Look, maps is always a nice, nice way to do it, you know, contour mapping. So, so yeah, you prefer or a cross section in terms of ERI, you know, cross sections, you work in different cross sections that are laying it, so it's like slices.

Molatelo CHOKOE   35:04
It.
Mm.

Ilse Kleinhans   35:25
So, and typically your geophysicist will do the interpretation of the data. If I start using more specialised data, I prefer a report on the geophysics. You know, it's not just only a map. So, so yeah, so that the geophysicist actually interpreted that data.

Molatelo CHOKOE   35:41
So.
Okay, and then what are the dangers of treating?

Ilse Kleinhans   35:48
But I want to.

Molatelo CHOKOE   35:52
What are the dangers of treating geophysical hazard maps as static products rather than time-sensitive interpretations?

Ilse Kleinhans   36:01
No, it's highly dangerous because especially on Dominic, it is very site specific and you can each single, I always say each single is unique. So it can give you a broad base idea, but at the end of the day, you still need to obtain site specific data.

Molatelo CHOKOE   36:05
Yeah.
Mhm.

Ilse Kleinhans   36:22
If you start, you know, are you involved with a risk like Singles, for example? You need to have such specific data.

Molatelo CHOKOE   36:32
OK, should hazard zonation products have review triggers linked to groundwater change, infrastructure failure, or land use change?

Ilse Kleinhans   36:42
Yes, all of that is relevant. I see, we did it for a, for example, we did a map of a low, medium, high risk, you know, for possibility, and that was based on existing information. We there was not say.

Molatelo CHOKOE   36:57
I.
The.

Ilse Kleinhans   37:01
adequate information, you know, it will say and undifferentiated because you can't say what it is. But it is regarded as a regional and it gives you an idea again, you know, what risk area you are. But still, once again, you will need to obtain site specific data.

Molatelo CHOKOE   37:23
Okay. And then how can geophysical uncertainty be made usable for disaster managers, not just engineers?

Ilse Kleinhans   37:23
Yeah.
Oh, that's a good question.
Because it's mostly related to the development that where you use it because of the the cost cost going with.
with it. I presume for environmental also, you know, because you can pollution, you can track pollution also with that. So yeah, I will need to think of it, but environmental for sure.

Molatelo CHOKOE   37:59
Mhm.

Ilse Kleinhans   38:06
Both from development and engineering now.

Molatelo CHOKOE   38:06
Mmh.
Okay. And then on your, on the slides, like the concluding slides, you emphasise collaboration between geophysicists and engineering geologists. So where does this collaboration most often break down?

Ilse Kleinhans   38:28
I presume it's a personal preference. Like for me, I said, you know, if you start working with more complex methodologies, it's always a good idea to have a discussion. You know, she might keep yourself busy with the things you
you know you can do. The geophysists are a specialist. Your engineer now, you know, they're looking at the Dominic, for example. But going on your own mission is not going to resolve issues. But by working together, you can come up maybe with a much better answer to any problem.
But I prefer, yeah, I say to talk to the geophysist also. If I start using more complex methodologies like ERI or seismics. Gravity for me is fine that I can, but yeah, I believe it should be in the, because you can get people that tax the data and they just go and drill.
and I can completely miss the target because I didn't discuss the matter with the geophysics because I now understand what they're looking at.

Molatelo CHOKOE   39:34
Mm.
Okay. What institutional or procurement structures make misinterpretation or underutilization of geophysical data more likely?

Ilse Kleinhans   39:52
That one I can't answer, right?
Because I always use, I prefer to use geophysics. For me, it's, I know what the value is, but some people, you know, might blindly go in and just do the drilling, but you can't really draw lines, just only from like where else you need.

Molatelo CHOKOE   40:22
Mm.

Ilse Kleinhans   40:23
of, say, high gradient field is shallow bedrock, so you can put a line around that and put if drill, obviously by drilling your gradient, you're going to know that's where you can get problematic issues and your low gradient fields also, same story. So if you just go and drill,
Basically, in my opinion, you must either drill a lot of burrels, but which is not cost effective. So geophysics is adding value in terms of cost effectiveness of a project because you need to drill less burrels. If you say, for example, do now a site development.
on dolomite. So that data helps with zoning of areas, making your drilling work less expensive because you drill less burrows.

Molatelo CHOKOE   41:15
Okay. Thank you. I have the last short three questions. So if you could change three things about how geophysical investigations for sinkholes and subsidence are commissioned and used, what would they be?

Ilse Kleinhans   41:21
Yes.
You.

Molatelo CHOKOE   41:33
Yeah.

Ilse Kleinhans   41:34
I wish people understand what they're looking at, first of all, or understand, you know, it's about how informative you are on this. And that, you know, the people that are selling some of the methods, you know, you need to be informative.

Molatelo CHOKOE   41:39
Mm.

Ilse Kleinhans   41:54
That's a big problem. Or make sure you understand what you're paying for and what you're going to get from that data. That's what's important. Because sometimes people just do things and then I said before, it's not adding any value. So that's the one thing that people are honest on.
What the ability of the specific method is, and what you can obtain from it.

Molatelo CHOKOE   42:22
Yes.

Ilse Kleinhans   42:23
That's one, but I can't think of something else, and you must use your brains. You must do Japanese.

Molatelo CHOKOE   42:23
Mm.
Yeah, yes.

Ilse Kleinhans   42:34
That's absolutely very slight words, not very polite, but if you're a person, you know, you work on a specific, it's contributing. That's what I'm trying to say. Use methods as contributing, geophysics is contributing. Sometimes people say, I will just throw more holes.

Molatelo CHOKOE   42:35
Okay.

Ilse Kleinhans   42:52
But actually, yeah, you, you, you shoot yourself in a in a foot by doing it in that manner, so...
I said one I can't think of currently.

Molatelo CHOKOE   43:07
Okay, and then what is the single most important message you would want provincial decision makers to take from your work?

Ilse Kleinhans   43:08
Yeah.
It is, unfortunately, it is very expensive, you know.
In calls and and and subsidences, maintenance on infrastructure is a critical critical.
that needs to be taken into consideration. And I know there isn't funds and now government, it's a big problem. But if you maintain your services, the possibility of single information is going to be less. So on the end of the day, you might, it might cost money, but you might also reduce.
the implication of it and loss of life. Because with sink of formation, you can get loss of life. It is, I said, expensive, but if you do proper Dominic risk management of the areas, then yeah, your possibility of sink of formation is reducing considerably.

Molatelo CHOKOE   43:55
Mmh.
Yes.

Ilse Kleinhans   44:16
So, dollar market risk management is critical.

Molatelo CHOKOE   44:20
Okay. The last question, are there other experts, data sets, or case studies you believe are critical for us to engage with in this project?

Ilse Kleinhans   44:32
Ooh.
I mean, they're all over, right? There's on the West Rand, the East Rand, and there is so many that show, and yeah, which one do you choose? But there is a lot. I think more, making more funding available for these things is what is important because

Molatelo CHOKOE   44:38
MPHELA.

Ilse Kleinhans   44:58
And now a lot of the municipalities, the well is there, but the funding is not there.

Molatelo CHOKOE   45:03
Ohh yeah, yes.
Yes.

Ilse Kleinhans   45:07
So there's a lot of people that really want to do something about a situation, but unfortunately the fans, it's it's.
That's what's hickering everything, everything at this stage. There's just not enough funds and it became so expensive because of all your materials that also became more expensive.

Molatelo CHOKOE   45:28
News.
Okay, thank you so much for...

Ilse Kleinhans   45:32
I want the risk management, that's my two things.

Molatelo CHOKOE   45:36
Yes, yes.

Ilse Kleinhans   45:40
Is there anything else you would like to know?

Molatelo CHOKOE   45:41
Thank you.
No, that's all from me. Thank you so much.

Ilse Kleinhans   45:48
Ah, it's a big place.

Molatelo CHOKOE   45:48
But.

Ilse Kleinhans   45:50
Yeah, and thank you for this. So, yeah, I hope you can make a make a difference so we can fix more singles.

Molatelo CHOKOE   45:57
Yes.
Yes, yes.

Ilse Kleinhans   46:02
At.

Molatelo CHOKOE   46:03
Okay, thank you.

Ilse Kleinhans   46:05
Thank you, and you must have a nice day, and I hope I will hear it from you.

Molatelo CHOKOE   46:07
Thank you.
Yes. Have a great day. Bye.

Ilse Kleinhans   46:11
Again, bye-bye, bye.

 stopped transcription
