PROVINCIAL DOLOMITE & SINKHOLE DISASTER PREPAREDNESS Tony A Bear Interview-20260121_140628-Meeting Recording
January 21, 2026, 12:06PM
1h 2m 25s

Slindo Mavuso started transcription

Slindo Mavuso   0:04
Yeah. So Ray was like you had spoken in sagas, but I definitely will, I will maybe ask you to just send me an e-mail of those people and then I will definitely chat to them afterwards. Yeah, but I have read a lot of the papers and stuff like that, obviously of the area and I am trying to permit more. My PhD was in East Africa.

Tony A'Bear   0:13
True, they they just.
OK.

Slindo Mavuso   0:23
I worked in the Rift area, but I do have students that are. I'm coming back into the cradle, so I yeah, I as well. Like the whole idea of it doesn't make sense for me to be a South African and not work in South Africa for a lot of my research. So I had, like sort of.

Tony A'Bear   0:25
2nd.
OK. Thank you.

Slindo Mavuso   0:42
You know, deviated away because of all the drama that happens around the cradle area. But I was like, you know what? I need to be a bit more mature about it and just do my thing. Yeah. So yeah. Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   0:44
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, Louis and and Matthais have just completed a book on the cast of Southern Africa. I think I I don't have a copy myself. It it came out, I think last year.

Slindo Mavuso   1:01
Oh great.

Tony A'Bear   1:10
But I must get hold of a copy the other yard, and I did the geotech and stability investigation for the visitor centre at Stoke Fintean Caves way back when.

Slindo Mavuso   1:12
Yeah.
Oh, lovely. Oh, that's great.

Tony A'Bear   1:27
But people the the two people who wrote historically a great deal about cast one was Margaret Marker, who was based at Fortier and the other was.

Slindo Mavuso   1:40
MMM.

Tony A'Bear   1:44
None.
None.

Slindo Mavuso   1:48
Not Wilkinson.

Tony A'Bear   1:50
Was no, the name's familiar, but was Jacques Jacques Martini.

Slindo Mavuso   1:56
OK. Yes, yes, yes, I do. I do. I I had. Yeah. I have a lot of his stuff. Yeah, actually, a lot of my for my bosses. I was kind of testing a few of the models. And one of those models was Martini's models.

Tony A'Bear   2:01
Yeah.
OK.

Slindo Mavuso   2:12
So yeah, so I I'm familiar with his work. Quite familiar with his work.

Tony A'Bear   2:17
I don't know if he's still alive, but he was quite grumpy when I last spoke to him.

Slindo Mavuso   2:22
He was, I know he was not doing well in. When was it around?

Tony A'Bear   2:29
He he was in France and I spoke to him. Yeah. I I spoke to him quite a while back. 'cause I wanted to get a a copy of a map that he has in in his chapter on cast in the back of the geology of South Africa.

Slindo Mavuso   2:32
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.

Tony A'Bear   2:51
There's a a very nice map showing where caves are predominant and so on, but it's a tiny map, you know, very small. So I wanted to get the original and see if we could put it on GIS. And he's well, you'll have to talk to so. And so about it, it was, you know, it was not at all out for the.

Slindo Mavuso   2:59
Hmm.
Yeah.
Not very forthcoming. Yeah, yeah, I sort of. I mean, I I did have a look at your presentation a little bit. So I sort of have an idea of sort of. Yeah. But I I didn't want to sort of also like, you know, get more insight because, you know, when you have a, when you give a presentation, you only have.

Tony A'Bear   3:10
Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   3:26
Like 15 minutes to sort of. Yeah. So yeah. I mean, I do have some leading questions, but I've I've noticed that every time I prepare for one of these. Yeah, the conversation just sort of goes. And I mean, there's a lot of information.

Tony A'Bear   3:27
10 minutes. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Be sure.
Well, you're welcome to to shoot the questions in at any stage. That's fine. No problem.

Slindo Mavuso   3:44
Yeah. Yeah. But I mean, I I did. I see, I did see that you premised a lot of the work on like, you know, what's what's the guy's name? Like one of the quotes that you had. But yeah. So. So I just wanted to ask like from your perspective what like was the single, what do you think are like the things that are most?
Misunderstood in you know, sinkhole hard hazard donations in the telematric terrain.

Tony A'Bear   4:13
Misunderstood by sorry. I just want to close my door. The wind is going.

Slindo Mavuso   4:16
No problem.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   4:21
I live in Cape Town now in fishhook, and the wind is quite something else when you.

Slindo Mavuso   4:27
I literally flew in from Cape Town so I could. We could have just made at a restaurant. I literally flew in yesterday from Cape Town. Yeah, yeah.

Tony A'Bear   4:32
Oh.
Oh, really? Oh, I will. Anytime you're around. Give me a shout. I'm happy to meet up with you. When you say misunderstood. Is that by engineering geologists or by people who kind of live and work on dolomite?

Slindo Mavuso   4:40
No problem. Yeah.
I would say mostly by people who live and work on them, but also just like the engineering geology part of it also would be if you see if there's there's any overlap within. Like responding, yeah.

Tony A'Bear   5:03
Yeah.
So one of the big misunderstood things in, in and amongst even amongst engineers who practise who who are fairly familiar with dolomite is the rate at which the rock weathers and a lot of people.
People assume that a leaking service literally Withers away the rock underneath their houses or structures, when in fact the problem is really the leaking service is washing soil down into existing cavities.
And it's something that I try and explain quite frequently. You know, is that the rate of weathering of rock is, if you constantly rained upon it or leaked water onto it in 100 years, you might get A10 millimetres of rock weathered away, you know.
And it's it's that concept of how The Cave forms and how the sinkhole then subsequently forms is probably the most misunderstood amongst the lay and.

Slindo Mavuso   6:15
MMM.

Tony A'Bear   6:21
And engineering people. And you frequently see even reporters who are reporting on the, you know, the stuff get the same thing wrong. You know that. And and there's someone who who's associated with.

Slindo Mavuso   6:38
Yeah.
And.

Tony A'Bear   6:40
Acid mine drainage and she's become quite an activist from the movie strand. I can't think of her name now. My wife would know her. You know, she in one of her statements or articles was talking about acid mine, drainage triggering sinkholes.

Slindo Mavuso   6:42
Aye.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   6:59
By withering away the rock underneath, you know. And again, that's a complete misconception. But people don't understand that. So that I I think is your. It's frequently misunderstood that you know where does the sinkhole or the subsidence come from?

Slindo Mavuso   7:05
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
OK.

Tony A'Bear   7:20
Within within the the profession I I think Dave, Patrick and I are in the process of writing some papers trying to.
Actually regenerate some of the the practises that were prevalent in the 1980s where there was a better understanding of how gravity surveys relate to the drilling results that we get and amongst in the profession. Quite often people will.
Do a gravity survey. Do the drilling of the anomalies not get a perfect tie in because you very rarely do cast is not uniform and then try and put little circles around the bad ball holes and go. These are the bad ball holes.

Slindo Mavuso   8:00
Play song.

Tony A'Bear   8:11
Instead of going actually, this is, you know, a mix of good and bad boreholes within this gravity feature, and we must understand that better. So yeah, so we we've been pushing that side of things is like get a better understanding.

Slindo Mavuso   8:16
Yeah.
I love.

Tony A'Bear   8:30
Any of how the geophysics and the drilling tie in together?

Slindo Mavuso   8:36
Yeah, yeah. And the one thing I really liked when I was looking at the presentation is you mentioned that.

Tony A'Bear   8:38
None.

Slindo Mavuso   8:45
There is no like one singular like, you know, there's no silver bullet in this prediction, and managing of the stuff. I don't think that the policy like, I don't think government is it's it's penetrating through government's head that a lot of the times.

Tony A'Bear   8:53
No.
Hmm.

Slindo Mavuso   9:03
That we can't just fix, we we can't be. I think when you say that they think, OK, cool. All we have to do is not like navigate, you know, just like respond to it. But whereas this clearly is ways to kind of like, you know, sort of group things around and then sort of have.

Tony A'Bear   9:14
Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   9:21
Some consists not 'cause. It's easy, but like sort of like a mind map, essentially where you should be going. You know, like a flow chart of where you should be going. And I think that's sort of the direction I had when I had my conversation with Ray. That's sort of the direction where I want to like sort of write this report around like.

Tony A'Bear   9:33
And.

Slindo Mavuso   9:36
Making them clearly understand that it's not just like, OK, cool. It's just one problem and you're going to solve it now. That's it. It's not like that. It doesn't work like that. It never has worked like that. There's a lot more complications. Maintenance is an issue. There's a lot of different factors that are issues, you know.

Tony A'Bear   9:40
No.
No.
I I you might want to talk to Dave Buttrick as well. He he's doctor Dave Buttrick. He he he's got a lot more knowledge of the statistics.

Slindo Mavuso   9:54
And.

Tony A'Bear   10:09
He's done a lot of work with public works and he he's, you know, able to to pull out stats relating to to the improvement in in.
Sinkhole development, or the reduction in sinkhole development once you put certain measures in place and and how you know how well they've worked and what the vast majority you know, the vast majority of sinkholes are triggered by water infiltrating from the surface. Some of the really bad ones.

Slindo Mavuso   10:36
And.
Yeah.
Aye.

Tony A'Bear   10:46
The ones that hit the newspaper headlines were triggered by dewatering by the mines, but that that you know, that is a problem and we have to look at it. But by foreign way, the vast majority of the signals that we deal with are due to infiltration through leaking services.

Slindo Mavuso   10:52
Hey.

Tony A'Bear   11:04
Poorly backfill trenches etcetera and that that is some maintenance proper construction and then maintenance are are key to to the stability of the area it's.

Slindo Mavuso   11:07
And.
MMM.

Tony A'Bear   11:20
It's and, but that thing of not having a silver bullet is is is quite difficult to get across because you know the at the end of the day cast is an incredibly complex.
You know rock formation and and the soils above it equally complex and and difficult to understand and interpret and and you know we we get time and again we get to a physicist to come and say.
We can find the cavities. We can find the sinkholes and they they can't the, you know, the the sinkhole, maybe the the cavity, maybe 30-40 metres under bedrock.
And it's the Fisher leading to it, which you know we we quite often find that a sinkhole happens over here, but the cavity is actually 20304050 metres off to the side. You know, if you I try and get people to picture the Stagfentine caves.
You know that's your cavity and that maybe that's 50-60 metres underground. It's the points where soil can access that cavity and be washed down into it, that become the the sinkholes and even they migrate sideways depending on the soil horizons and how they look.

Slindo Mavuso   12:33
Hmm.
There's a.
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   12:47
No ducks and all sorts of other things can affect the direction in which the the cavity moves as it develops.

Slindo Mavuso   12:54
And I just think also I mean like just mythologically, I mean that stuff is Berlin, it's a billionaire old stuff. So it's not particularly easy to like. Yeah, it's messy geology. It's very, very messy geology.

Tony A'Bear   13:00
Right.
And and subjected to to quite a few I I can't recite them off hand, but quite a few weathering processes it's been exposed, withered the Roy Hook deformation was was deposited. It was buried the whole lot. You know the rest of the transfer I put on top and said.

Slindo Mavuso   13:21
Very.

Tony A'Bear   13:26
Exposed again, quite a few cast period subsequently so you know and some of that got buried again by the crew you know, so you've got really complex geomorphological history that that you're trying to understand and and.

Slindo Mavuso   13:27
Aye.
Yeah.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   13:45
No, and then the formations themselves, yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   13:45
Yeah. So the idea if even if a silver bullet is not feasible, essentially. Yeah. Yeah. And even, I mean, I mean, yeah. So yeah, I mean, yeah, you sort of. Yeah. Basically that whole thing you've sort of answered most of what I was going to ask you in that section. So yeah. Overburden water table.

Tony A'Bear   13:49
No.

Slindo Mavuso   14:04
Oh yeah, yeah. And then, yeah, and I think I did want to say I I just wanted to sort of probe you on you. What I really did also appreciate about the stuff that you're talking about is that you do, like sort of look.
Add historical data and historical stuff that has happened, you know, and do you think that we've like the practises, have improved a little bit or do you think nothing has finally changed in terms of previous disasters like in the in the, in the, in the, in the 70s and stuff like that?
Do you think we have better ways to respond to it or are we just not really learning the lessons or just just like stakeholders not really learning the the the ways?

Tony A'Bear   14:49
So I I think the Council for Geoscience play an incredibly important role now, every which is a huge improvement on the way things were happening, say even back in the 80s when I was working at the Council for Geoscience.
We would pass comment on housing developments only in some of the provinces, depending on on the local provincial laws, but the now legally the Council for Geoscience has jurisdiction jurisdiction.

Slindo Mavuso   15:13
Mm-hmm.
OK.
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   15:27
Over every single bit of work geotechnical work that is done on dolomite and you have to pass it through them and they are data banking that and they're doing that very effectively and they have been for quite some years.

Slindo Mavuso   15:42
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   15:45
My big argument with him and and the data from that is really accessible so often you can go back and get records. Ah, we had a drilling a ball that was drilled in I think it was for check that was from the 1950s. You know it wasn't.

Slindo Mavuso   15:48
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   16:03
As detailed as we would have liked it to be by current standards, but it is good it's it's got basic geological information where we are having a Barney with him at the moment and I understand it's going to be sorted out. Is that for some bizarre reason they've decided that.

Slindo Mavuso   16:07
Start.

Tony A'Bear   16:22
The positions or or the data relating to sinkholes is to be kept secret, so if I go to them with a site and I say please show me the sinkholes around this, they'll send me a map.
Showing where the sinkholes are and then I say, OK, how big were these sinkholes? And they refused to give me that now.

Slindo Mavuso   16:49
Yeah, I mean, I also, yeah, I that's very interesting that you mentioned that 'cause. I also been trying to speak to somebody else from there and she now has to like get approval from her CEO or something like that.

Tony A'Bear   17:01
Yeah. Who are you speaking to, by the way? Janette, bunk. Yeah, yeah. You might want to go over ahead and speak to official and gobelanga about them.

Slindo Mavuso   17:04
Jeanette from.
I I I want to speak to him as well, so I want to speak to both of them.

Tony A'Bear   17:18
Yeah, sofiso is brilliant. We do a lot of work with him, Dave and I wanting to write some papers with him as well, and he he has made enormous advances in terms of working with.

Slindo Mavuso   17:21
Well.

Tony A'Bear   17:35
The provinces and the cities, the metropolitan areas around management of the risk and disasters. So I would he he probably should be #1 on your list quite, Frankie.

Slindo Mavuso   17:36
Hmm.
Hello.

Tony A'Bear   17:54
He would probably occupy an entire afternoon talking to you about this, and you may even want to to to visit him in person in Pretoria. He's he's.

Slindo Mavuso   17:58
OK, sorry about.

Tony A'Bear   18:08
Based part mostly in Maritzburg Peter Maritzburg, but he goes up to Pretoria every two weeks. I think it is, but he he, yeah, he he has a lot of knowledge on on the.

Slindo Mavuso   18:16
And.

Tony A'Bear   18:25
The the management side of both the data coming in the data going out and the interaction with.
Various metropolitan areas and that varies from metropolitan to metropolitan area, and it depends on who's in charge and and that has varied over the years. So for example, ikaroleni.

Slindo Mavuso   18:49
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   18:54
I would have said to you 15 years ago I would have said to you the the bar has the benchmark is is ikarolini. They have got a brilliant system in place. It's really good. The data banking, the process of of.

Slindo Mavuso   19:12
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   19:14
Absorbing information and and working with it. The kind of protection that they were offering their their residence was brilliant. It was just top class and that has subsequently.

Slindo Mavuso   19:15
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   19:32
Unfortunately.

Slindo Mavuso   19:35
Over time.

Tony A'Bear   19:35
Fallen by the wayside. Yeah, it's, I dare say, a measure of corruption and other unhappy things happening in there, but quite nowhere near the standard that was in place some time back. Hopefully it gets back up and and and back there again.

Slindo Mavuso   19:41
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   19:52
20 Who who probably have more sinkholes than any other city have got a dolomite. They've got what they call a geology unit who bet any.

Slindo Mavuso   20:05
Oh.

Tony A'Bear   20:07
Development that is on geology, but basically they rely on the Council for geoscience. If the Council for Geoscience approve it, they are happy they themselves don't databank to the extent that ichiroleni used to.
There's certainly no public access as far as I know. They don't want it to the water table the way ikarolini used to and to some extent do now, but not in any great detail.
So echolini in terms of Sands 1936 probably don't meet the requirements that that are required of a dolomite risk management system. Shawnee certainly don't.
Johannesburg in areas sporadic areas does meet the requirement in other areas doesn't, but overall probably not. So it kind of it varies within the municipalities quite unfortunately quite dramatically.

Slindo Mavuso   21:06
Yeah.
And what about the? I mean, what about the the Far West brand?
Area.

Tony A'Bear   21:19
That, yeah, so that again.
Varies quite a lot. I don't think that any of them have a solid system in place. They're very reliant on their their consultants.

Slindo Mavuso   21:42
No problem.

Tony A'Bear   21:43
You know, if that particular consultant falls out of favour or disappears, they may be left with quite, quite a gap in their knowledge. So yeah, I I don't think they quite get there, but Dave Buttrick might he does a lot of work.

Slindo Mavuso   21:52
Oops.

Tony A'Bear   22:01
With.
The western municipalities, so he would probably be able to give you much better insight as to what standards are in place there. And then at the national level you you mentioned water, one of the key areas for us is monitoring the water table.

Slindo Mavuso   22:08
OK.

Tony A'Bear   22:23
And one of the problems that's starting to rear its head, and I've been talking to.
Soficio about this at the Council for Geoscience is that there is enormous pressure on Rand water to drill holes and find water independent of the bar river supply system.
Not so much because the vault can't supply the water, but because their networks and pump stations can't supply the water. So I think at the moment the irrational is rather, let's take the water from the ground.
Closer to.

Slindo Mavuso   23:05
To the network about any part of them.

Tony A'Bear   23:07
To the to the yard, to whatever the you with the end user is. You know, if they've got an industrial area trying to suck enough water out to supply them. So there's quite a lot of interest in taking water out of the Dolomites, obviously. I mean the.
If you of the other units, possibly only the finished or bandicide, would have substantial amounts of water and and that's hugely concerning because our national network doesn't monitor the water properly.
It's devolved, supposedly down to municipal level. They they're the ones who are supposed to monitor the water local authority, but they don't. None of them do. It could really any used to Johannesburg doing in, in in some areas 20 have got a they actually extract water and use it.

Slindo Mavuso   23:51
Yeah.
Exactly.

Tony A'Bear   24:01
And so they monitor it to some extent, but there's no nationally coordinated programme as far as I know, which is looking at the overall use of water from the dolomite and saying this is the limit. That's what we can take out.
And we go no further and everything should be going through a single.

Slindo Mavuso   24:19
Yeah.
And.
I thought.
Repository, yeah.

Tony A'Bear   24:25
Authority, you know, for compliance. Yeah. And that I think is lacking. And I think it's a huge risk to development in all the dolomitic regions. Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   24:39
OK. Yeah. See, again, you've sort of answered it again, sort of the water that, yeah, the water table dynamics and yeah, so obviously like wait goes wrong and the failures. So like in your experience, is it the drill design, the drill strategy, the interpretation or the?
Translation to hazard zones you've you have mentioned, obviously that these these sort of yeah, this like extracting a lot of this underground waters like destabilising, do you think do you can you think of like maybe other things that you think?
Sort of posing these really big interpretation failures, especially like, you know, like, OK, we can't find, we don't know where this is or where the process is.

Tony A'Bear   25:23
I I think within the profession there is quite a lot of misunderstanding about how to interpret data. I don't think there is a uniform. For example, there's no course that is provided on.
Dolomite has an assessment. You know, we know you should do a gravity survey. We know you should do drilling, but when it comes to interpreting the data, that's very much up to old guys like me with experience.

Slindo Mavuso   25:41
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   25:56
Who? You know who have got it from previous practitioners passing that on and gaps have developed. There are quite a lot of young people who've moved into the field. They don't have my level of experience. They haven't necessarily worked.
With people who who have that level of experience, we have consultants who are coming in from other provinces, who who, who are not familiar with dolomite and they're doing work for iscom for, you know, various.

Slindo Mavuso   26:16
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   26:31
Government bodies and they have very little experience. So I've seen some of the reports coming out and there's some shockingly poor stuff being done. And and there's a lot of talk within the Institute for Engineering.

Slindo Mavuso   26:32
Yeah.
I.

Tony A'Bear   26:50
Geologists about mentoring programmes about getting that in place and getting courses in place, for example, are you familiar with the level 4 experts from the SANS 1936? So SANS 1936 is the.

Slindo Mavuso   26:53
Play song.
Hello.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   27:08
Regulatory framework within which we work and if there is a high hazard area that has been defined and you want to put a building onto it, then it has to go through a level 4 process.
And this has been refined. In fact, I I just sat in in the meeting earlier when 2013 ground was considered to be D4 as we call it. And it was, you know, kind of.

Slindo Mavuso   27:28
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   27:41
It was developed at the time on my say so the that would not happen now. Now we would go through a process where I would say so Council for geoscience would have to agree the two independent external reviewers would have to come in and they would.
Have to be level 4, reviewers, geotechnical engineers and engineering geologists. Now there are only eight people who have applied for and received in the engineering geology fraternity who have received Level 4 status and is a similar or lesser.

Slindo Mavuso   28:13
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   28:21
Amongst amongst geotechnical engineers, not all, all of those people are probably 60 years and older and the majority are white and male.
In fact, I cannot think of a single one who is not white. I can think of three women in amongst that, and so we've got a very, very serious problem where young people and especially the younger black people, are not.
Being pulled in and trained and and that's an enormous gap, which has been identified and hopefully within, you know, the coming year, we'll start putting out solutions. I'm I'm involved in the Fellows Committee for the Institute.
Of engineering geologists and you know, hopefully we'll start getting that mentorship process going soon. But yeah, the big gaps there in terms of knowledge, experience, experience is probably.

Slindo Mavuso   29:11
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   29:25
The most critical factor in terms of doing analytical work at the moment, it's very difficult for anyone you know, if you for example wanted to go in and do a dolomite has an investigation.
There's no one text that you or of course that you could go to and say, OK, teach me, you know, teach me how to do this. And you would end up having to find someone like myself and say, can I come and work with you?

Slindo Mavuso   29:48
Yeah.
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   29:56
You know, train under you and then go out on your own. So it's a it's a massive problem and we really, really need to address that.

Slindo Mavuso   29:57
OK.
Yeah. I mean, yeah, and I mean just in general as well, I mean, when I started working in with these rocks, it's yeah, I don't for a company that has a very big amount of them.

Tony A'Bear   30:24
Yo.
No.

Slindo Mavuso   30:28
I think the only attention is because of their, like their proximity to like the minds I guess was when they only started, but the actual like understanding them really taking them as seriously as anything else is not really it's something that I'm I'm I'm getting a sense that I mean even I I do teach them in in like third year but like.

Tony A'Bear   30:28
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.

Slindo Mavuso   30:47
Like I do have to make time. But when I was looking at other when I because I went to UTT and I went to vets and I teach at Rhodes, I did not learn anything about dollar lights. Really I did not learn about sinkholes. I did not learn about anything. I just yeah, it was just like that one thing that you need to know in chemical sedimentology and that's it, you know.

Tony A'Bear   30:57
Ryan Ryan.
You're right, you're right, you're right.

Slindo Mavuso   31:07
Yeah. So I think that also just has also fit in like just like the historic culturally historically it's just not a a thing that you think about. Yeah. Yeah. But that's another. That's another conversation for another day. Yeah. And also, I mean, you did.

Tony A'Bear   31:15
None.
Exactly, yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   31:24
You do make the point for, you know, for iterative processes to be in guess processes to be like quite fundamental in sort of addressing a lot of these failures. So why do you think it's really achieved in practise is just because of the complexities.
Of after work or do you think it's just the failures? As you've mentioned before, of the people that I should be doing it or yeah, this this historical knowledge, just like the lack of expertise and experience.

Tony A'Bear   31:55
Yeah, I I think it's something that's kind of crept up on us, to be honest. And and I think it's something that people haven't really thought about addressing up until recently.
And it's it's unfortunately become quite critical now I. I mean, I would be really interested to hear what Sofia's answer to that question is he probably has a bit more insight than I do.
But I'd I think the some of the universities for example, are passing people out as engineering geologists and they're not getting the proper training for engineering geology. I know some fisa's got a real gripe about that.

Slindo Mavuso   32:37
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   32:43
And these are hoping that the Institute would deal with it. But I don't think it will because it has, it has no regulatory function. It would have to be the South African Council of natural scientists.

Slindo Mavuso   32:51
Yes.

Tony A'Bear   32:58
Again, Sagna doesn't have a category yet for engineering geology per SE, we fall under the earth sciences or geology and and so there's no.
Requirement that to have professional status that you should have the requisite training. It's very easy for anyone with APR Skynet to pass themselves or.
As as having the required required expertise. So I think there's a regulatory function that needs to be be fixed. I think there's an educational function that needs to be fixed in terms of dolomite. I'm not saying engineering geology is very poorly understood, but.
Or or port, but I think dolomite is is particularly, so I think both of those two need to be improved and then as, as I said, the mentorship side of things that needs to be added in a big way.

Slindo Mavuso   33:59
Hmm.
OK. Yeah. Well, I mean, that's sort of answers a lot of the rest of everything was it ask you as well.
Yeah, let's see integration and long term. Yeah. So yeah, how? Yeah. So how do you think you know these hard donations be integrating with hydrological chain, infrastructural ageing and mining legacy risk over time so.
How would you sort of go about with these integrations of, you know these long term multi hazard plannings if you oh how would you suggest that they go like cocktail should be be thinking about kind of creating an ecosystem?
That will help close the gaps you know in in terms of not only predicting when these single Z are, but also managing the risk as well.

Tony A'Bear   35:03
So Sands, in terms of managing the risk Sands, 1936 requires dollar mark risk management plans to be drawn up for any new development and and those are quite successful in some instances. We were many instances.

Slindo Mavuso   35:13
Mm-hmm.

Tony A'Bear   35:20
Um where, but does usually end at.
Either the managers of a facility or the managers and owners of a facility, so it might be a mine would have a dollar mark, risk management plan and they would integrate it into their.
The risk management plan overall, a residential place, for example Serengeti and a number of others in the Centurion area have dolomite risk management plans, where they've appointed someone to go in on a.

Slindo Mavuso   35:48
Oh.

Tony A'Bear   35:59
Monthly or six monthly basis to do the monitoring and put together a report. So I feel like risk management is starting to happen at a very local level, if you like, where it's maybe not happening effectively.

Slindo Mavuso   36:02
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   36:19
Is at your local authority and and upwards. I'm not sure if karting, for example, includes dolomite as part of the risk management strategy. Again, that is something that they've.

Slindo Mavuso   36:24
Yeah.
And.
MMM.

Tony A'Bear   36:38
Patrick may be able to help you with on that question, he.

Slindo Mavuso   36:41
Yeah, I mean, I'm, I'm, I'm technically doing this stuff for them, so I'm I'm working for kakta provincial. Yeah, but I mean, I can tell you that I don't. I do not think so. Yeah, they even they they just sent me one of the databases and they well, it's actually not even a database.

Tony A'Bear   36:48
OK, OK.
OK.

Slindo Mavuso   37:00
The catalogue they don't even know the difference. So I was like, and whoever was filling it in, it's not very useful or helpful. So yeah, I think. Yeah. And that's sort of why I was like, I wanted to have chat with you guys, you know, like people that have actually worked on this for a very, very long time and sort of informed.

Tony A'Bear   37:17
Mm-hmm.

Slindo Mavuso   37:20
From the like the other backbone of of this report, you know like, because I think that everything else where they we can we can we can sit down and talk about tell talk about the communities and how they're affected. But at the end of the day we need to start thinking being very, very very.

Tony A'Bear   37:36
You're gonna manage that risk? Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   37:40
You know more active about actually dealing with this and I don't think there has been a very, yeah, a very systemic intentional there because yeah, even with you with a few people I've interviewed.
There's clearly pockets of people, but it's not as impactful and it would be more useful if you have an ecosystem around this. You know, like a very I wouldn't say top down, but like a one that is being completely monitored or supported by the provincial government because most of the singles of this country happen in the Haltang region. So it is.

Tony A'Bear   38:17
Yeah, we have vast majority, yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   38:18
Actually kind of mind boggling. Yeah, it's kind of mind boggling why it doesn't exist, you know. But I mean, it's something I'm going to have to report to them. I mean, yeah, I'm. I'm. I'm getting the sense the the more I talk to them, the more sort of.

Tony A'Bear   38:24
Zeki.

Slindo Mavuso   38:36
Hostile. They are becoming. But I'm just like, well, you guys, you guys asked me to help you with this. So this is the reality. Yeah. So. But I'm. I'm glad you're saying that because I it's definitely something I want to report to them. Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   38:39
Issues.
Yeah.
You you want to know the truth, you ask the question now.

Slindo Mavuso   38:53
Yeah. And then, yeah, I think I've sort of got it most, but I mean, let me just see in my list of things, yeah.

Tony A'Bear   39:01
I I would be interested to hear what Sophisa has to say about the way the answer to your question there about how things need to be integrated because you know some pressure from hot.

Slindo Mavuso   39:01
Yes.
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   39:16
Ting at as a province on the local authorities to unify their approach to dolomite risk management and to meet the required standard of reporting, we've just got a hell of a long way to making all of this work.

Slindo Mavuso   39:34
MMM.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   39:36
Let me give you a great example. The in in in the hazard assessment that we do, we have to do 2 hazard assessments, one and stop me if you're familiar with this. But the one is what we call the ingress scenario. So you assume that a water pipe leaks.

Slindo Mavuso   39:48
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   39:54
And then what does that do? That's your triggering mechanism. And then the other one is if the groundwater is drawn down the dewatering scenario, what happens then? So those are the two scenarios that we we have to look at with every investigation.

Slindo Mavuso   39:56
Aye.
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   40:13
Now the water table forms the base level of erosion. So if you have a leaking service and the water's percolating down as soon as it reaches the water water table, it loses its energy and that's its ability to erode the material into an underlying cavity.

Slindo Mavuso   40:28
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   40:31
So the water table is a crucial element in providing stability. However, if you draw the water table down, if it's above bedrock, and you draw the water table down, especially in the areas where it's shallow close to surface, less than 15 metres of below surface.

Slindo Mavuso   40:35
Yeah.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   40:50
It will trigger sinkholes and the vast majority of sinkholes triggered on the West land were triggered where the water table is shallow but where the water table is shallow is currently the most stable area. If you asked me where I want to go and live on the Dolomites, I would say it's where the water table is well above bedrock.
But in that scenario, that becomes highly hazardous.

Slindo Mavuso   41:13
Mm-hmm.

Tony A'Bear   41:14
Unless the local authority can show that they are monitoring and controlling the groundwater table now, icarolini used to do that, they've stopped doing it, and that automatically means, for example, parts of clave oil.

Slindo Mavuso   41:21
Hmm.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   41:32
Large parts of Fort Lewis Catalong to cause have shallow water tables now that used to be monitored and they used to say OK, we will protect development within that area. So your hazard devil assessment.
In dewatering could be discarded and your foundation solutions and the ability to develop then became a lot easier.

Slindo Mavuso   41:51
Yeah.
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   41:59
But once you take the dewatering scenario into account, then the hazard level increases and that becomes your design level. And sometimes that just prevents development or it makes it extremely expensive. But it's a kind of.

Slindo Mavuso   42:06
Hey.

Tony A'Bear   42:16
Highly unlucky scenario springs, for example, has large areas with a very shallow water table. If you were to dewater the the area under springs, there'd be sinkholes all over the place. It would be a national disaster. It would be exactly the same as the the waste grand you would.

Slindo Mavuso   42:28
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   42:35
They have huge sinkholes and big problems, but but we don't monitor the water table, we don't guarantee the safety of those residents and it's it's a it's a real, real problem. So it it's like, I mean if I was a resident living in those areas, I would be a little bit irate that.

Slindo Mavuso   42:53
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   42:55
My safety is not being guaranteed by the authorities at that level, but also as developer in that area. It means that the current safe ground is now not approachable because in a dewatering scenario becomes unsafe and that's the overriding.

Slindo Mavuso   43:08
Yeah.
OK.
Hey.

Tony A'Bear   43:14
Scenario. So a lot of development is now being shunted onto areas that are actually less safe because the dewatering scenario doesn't apply there because the water tables below bedrock level. So it's, you know.
Coordinated effort to put in place a dolomite risk management plan over the entire dolomitic area would free up areas for development. It would guarantee the safety of the residents and and workers. You know it would.

Slindo Mavuso   43:40
None.

Tony A'Bear   43:48
You know, I just think it's so fundamentally important.

Slindo Mavuso   43:50
And also just compliance, you know having having like standards on compliance as you said like from a professional standpoint. But I mean I had a whole section about that, but you already answered that you know and just like also professional accountability I think is another thing that we're really not thinking about, OK.

Tony A'Bear   43:53
Yeah.
Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   44:10
If you are going to do a, a A slapdash work on these areas and that and something happens, what are the implications of that exactly? Well.

Tony A'Bear   44:15
Oh yeah.
What are the consequences are within my company we address that I mean within the company that I'm a partner in at the moment we address that quite frequently. We hammer it into the young guys working with us.
Is that you are now professional. You're registered. It's your neck on the block. You say this guy can put a house there and these are the solutions. If that house falls down and it's your solution that's wrong. You're the guy that's going to go to gaol.
Along with us, of course, because we would have signed it off, but but that is what professional responsibility is about. And I'm, I don't know if you've been following the Yorks, fantain trial, the murder trial, that for me is quite interesting because it's the first time that I've seen professionals charged with.

Slindo Mavuso   45:05
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   45:11
Murder. The murder charges won't stick, but they might be able to make a culpable homicide. Charges stick. And that has massive implications. And I think it will, you know, if even now I think it's starting to make people.

Slindo Mavuso   45:12
And.

Tony A'Bear   45:31
Professionals sit up and think because of the first time, people have actually been charged with responsibility and that should happen in the the Dolomites as well. Both individual professionals who do the work and the professionals within the.

Slindo Mavuso   45:42
Thank you.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   45:50
Authorities and and there are a lot of professionals within the authorities who can stand up and, you know, put that in. You should be held responsible.

Slindo Mavuso   45:59
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Thanks. Thanks for that. Yeah. I mean, there's these two. I mean, sort of like, I always ask these just for the sake of it. Yeah. If you had to change maybe like, two or three things.
About the dolomitic investigations commissioned that I use in South Africa, what would it be you know?
Like so, how these studies are done?

Tony A'Bear   46:26
How do you I I think that I mean it's something that I tried to push when we last looked at doing a revision of the Sands 1936. Are you familiar with Sands 1936?

Slindo Mavuso   46:41
I I I did. I did skim over it when I when I was starting the project, but I yeah, I will, I will familiarise myself again.

Tony A'Bear   46:46
OK.
But I think overall it's a very good set of standards and it certainly gives us a framework to to, to work with and and work with. Well, I think it needs tweaking, you know, and the next revision should be coming out for public comment in the next.

Slindo Mavuso   46:56
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.

Tony A'Bear   47:06
Well, hopefully couple of months it was supposed to have been done years ago, but apparently the Bureau of Standards is not functioning at well. So so I got hung up the areas that I would like to see improvement are the education of the professional.
Doing the work and then the equipment that we use, we are using techniques that the drilling techniques in particular we are using that.
Well, percussion drilling was started in the 70s and 80s. Apart from the machines becoming more powerful, we haven't actually improved our our standards with respect to them.

Slindo Mavuso   47:48
Yeah.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   47:54
So we rely heavily on a guy with a stopwatch and a bit of knowledge about how that what's happening to give us a lot of detail on the information coming out with the drilling process that.

Slindo Mavuso   48:08
Mm-hmm.

Tony A'Bear   48:12
There there is. I mean it's available not freely, but it's available that we can put in digital monitoring systems, things like the Jean Lute system where you monitor digitally monitor and record penetration rates, airflow.
Talk on the bit the the shockwave that travels back up the the drill string as it's as it as the percussion drill is happening. All of those things properly recorded and and analysed would add.

Slindo Mavuso   48:42
And.

Tony A'Bear   48:48
Substantially to our understanding of the profile because Rotary core drilling is extremely expensive, it's extremely difficult to do in the dollar mites because of the church within the very loose.

Slindo Mavuso   49:03
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   49:03
Soils it you know, it's in fact very rarely works. Not that I I haven't used it. I've used it quite substantially in in some areas where I know the uniform.

Slindo Mavuso   49:17
My love.

Tony A'Bear   49:19
Actually profile is amenable to to being to Rotary core drilling being used or or the holes where we go down them and take samples. So Percussion drilling is is going to remain our.
Major tool for for investigating and I think that that is the one area that we could really, really, really improve on the way we extract information from, from, from the, from the process.
So that I would like to see and then, yeah, education, getting standards, making sure there's a uniform approach and standard that people log properly. Yeah. I mean, we do offer courses on that. I run one from the institute.

Slindo Mavuso   49:52
Hmm.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   50:12
And I know both World, Sydney, Pretoria and I think Stellenbosch for the engineers run profiling training courses. So yeah, those are.

Slindo Mavuso   50:24
And.
Yeah, I mean, I do think also from what I'm also sensing from you is they just need to be more scientists in the government because a lot of these.
It seems like a lot of choices are being are not informed that are being made, or like taking certain things out and not realising the the value of of of still having that that certain thing over there. So I think maybe I should. I did also want to mention that they should be hiring a few, like quite a few more engineering geologists.
By town planners to be actually on in the government, like I said, as the part of the government themselves, I think that's an because they are. It seems that a lot of choices historically are just being made because someone is like, well, this hasn't happened yet, but no one is actually seeing the value of certain things.

Tony A'Bear   51:01
And.
Did.

Slindo Mavuso   51:19
Being there from from previous standards.

Tony A'Bear   51:22
Have you had any interactions with Amanda Moyo from Johannesburg?

Slindo Mavuso   51:29
Yes, I've. I've met up with them. Yeah, I've, I've. I've met up with them twice. I I I I so I set up that we set up an I'm not interviewing her. One of my other team members is. Yeah, but I've I've she was in a meeting with me when I was sort of introducing it to sort of all the stakeholders within.

Tony A'Bear   51:35
She.
I agree.
OK.

Slindo Mavuso   51:49
The the. Yeah. And then she had, obviously we had a brief chat about it, just presenting it to them. Why? Why it's important and all that kind of stuff. Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   51:55
Is that?
She's she's a great example. I think of the mismanagement of scientists by by the authorities, Johannesburg. Johannesburg is our biggest metropolitan.
Wealthiest metropolitan and she's the sole engineering geologist. She's the only one. She's just she can't cope. There's no reason Earth that you can expect this poor person to cope. She and she was dumped in there with very little experience. If I remember correctly.
And I I you know, so I I think I completely agree with you more scientists in the in the authorities, I think the Council for Geoscience have employed a lot of people in the recent probably the last two years, their dolomite.
Section has expanded quite substantially. I'm sure official would tell you that he needs more people, but but yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   52:57
I mean, I would agree. I mean I I've, I mean I've I deal with the CGS sort of like in three or four provinces and I I'm still sort of mind blown by how much stuff they have to cover. So the fact that they have to cover so many issues within so many things that they have.

Tony A'Bear   53:04
Hmm.
Hmm.

Slindo Mavuso   53:15
To cover means they don't have, they just don't have the capacity, yet they don't have the critical capacity still, but they are doing very, very good work, way better, like in comparison to their resources. They are kind of knocking it out of the walk.

Tony A'Bear   53:16
Yeah.
And then the other.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, right, right. Exactly. Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   53:33
But I mean, yeah. But I mean that's that's also like a you don't want to be in a situation like that where you have to be working at your wit's end because if someone crucial decides screw this, I'm going into mining, which is what most people do actually half the time. Then we're screwed. But you know, but if we have critical capacity, that's not.

Tony A'Bear   53:39
Yeah.
No.
Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   53:52
Going to be if you have a lot more people doing a lot more people that are competent doing the work, then we should be fine, you know.

Tony A'Bear   53:55
Hello.
I was at A at a I did a small presentation at the.
Was it the International Geological Society meeting in Cape Town? I don't know. 10 years ago and there was a Chinese guy who who did a presentation just after me.
And and he was obviously quite high up in the equivalent of the Geological Survey. And he came in just before he was due to present. He walked onto the stage. He had two or three people filming him. But the statistics that he threw at us were.
Mind blowing and he just went, you know, we've got. I can't remember how many square kilometres of of dolomite and how many thousands of kilometres of Hwy. Crossing them we go in and we do it like this and we met.
We decided we needed to map all 500,000 square kilometres. We did it within three years. We just, you know that kind of we we we just putting the the resources in there and we'll do it you know.
We would not get anywhere near doing that. You know, it's it's. Yeah. And and I mean.

Slindo Mavuso   55:20
Yeah, I mean. But I mean one of the reasons why I am actually part of this report is to sort of give some recommendations at the end and and mostly also a section to like, almost strategize around.
Asking Treasury for more money for these resources, I mean, hopefully it goes to the right places, but.

Tony A'Bear   55:40
I I I I yeah. Well it's not going there but but I think I I think those individuals like Amanda need to be empowered.

Slindo Mavuso   55:43
Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   55:55
20 for example, who have the most sinkholes have got two. I think they've now got a third person in their geology unit and they deal with all development on dolomite and off dolomite and so they processing thousands of things. Obviously, dolomite is probably there.
Overriding problem but from a geotechnical perspective, but three people you know dealing with that mass is bizarre. They should have a team of 30 in there. You know, it should easily be 10 times that amount.
And they should be properly resourced. Access to databanks, yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   56:37
Yeah. I mean, there's so many aspects as well of it like you just don't go there and that's it, you know, I mean, I have a friend just to show you how pervasive this problem is. I have a friend who, she, she's a palaeontologist.

Tony A'Bear   56:41
Yeah, yeah. I mean you must.

Slindo Mavuso   56:53
And she works. She basically works in the cradle area and and and basically most of how Dang to be honest on like, you know, she reviews all the pedicological impact assessments and she's only on working on it.
I'm on this a similar sort of committee here, and there's six of us and from the six of us, three of us do palaeontology. The other three do archaeology and I'm in there because I have a degree in both palaeontology and archaeology.
And geology. So I also actually also look at the geology within the area and it works fine. We have meetings happen once a month, 333 very thorough reports, things are done. We have a database. She has to sit down and.
Basically, go through all of that stuff. She's a dinosaur specialist, so everything she gets outside of dinosaurs, she has to like, basically sit down and research it and figure it out. And you know, and we have a big idea. South Africa has, like, a crazy paleontological record. So she's always, like doing that. So most of her.

Tony A'Bear   57:55
Don't look it up.
Hello. Hello, hello.

Slindo Mavuso   58:05
Time is basically spent on catching UPS. I can't so I when when you mention things like Amanda, I'm like, I can't even imagine what she's she has to do all the time just to keep up, you know? Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   58:17
Yeah, I I I came into contact with her because Johannesburg has the only only municipal and functioning geotechnical data back and it barely functions now. Poor Amanda. It's it's one of her.

Slindo Mavuso   58:31
Hmm.

Tony A'Bear   58:35
Babies, I'm sure she's got many. So you have to phone her and I can get access.

Slindo Mavuso   58:37
Yeah, I heard about it. I I heard about it recently.

Tony A'Bear   58:41
Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   58:43
Ray told me about it recently. Yeah, and yeah, I think that's sort of everything for me. I think that the only thing I'd, I'd I'd ask if you're OK with is this sharing any reports or any papers that you think would help?

Tony A'Bear   58:45
Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   58:59
You know, articulate these questions, articulate these problems. I can send you sort of the the Dolomites strategy structure and if you can look at it and just let me know, where do you think I should be looking at the information? Because I I I as my chest. This is very very valuable.

Tony A'Bear   59:10
Yeah, OK. Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   59:18
I do. I don't think they were. I suspect they were not looking at historical work or anything done. So anything that you think would be useful and also just like just throw out any names that you think I should. People I should speak to that you think would be really useful in helping advise this report and.

Tony A'Bear   59:24
MMM.

Slindo Mavuso   59:37
What the what the the provincial government should actually be doing? I think that that would be really useful. I mean, and also I just want to make sure that everyone's sort of perspective, especially with professionals, is articulated properly when this, when this report comes out, you know.

Tony A'Bear   59:41
Exactly.
Yeah.
Hmm.

Slindo Mavuso   59:56
And I've made a very conscious decision to, I mean, I will be interviewing all stakeholders, including the people in government, but it's pretty just from speaking up to the academics and and you guys so far.
It's clear it's clear that, yeah, it's. They just need to. This is they need. There has to be an intentional ecosystem. They have to sit down and create an intentional ecosystem where all of the stuff can be fixed. See what we have on the ground, see what works and how it can kind of fit into this massive system.

Tony A'Bear   1:00:26
Mm-hmm.

Slindo Mavuso   1:00:30
In terms of building critical capacity in terms of not only just like you know managing the risk, but also responding to it, because I did see that they were trying to sort of push the conversation around, OK, how do we help people? So I won't be talking to people that have been affected and stuff like that, but I.
I think it's too late by then. You know, I think it's too late then response. I mean the response as well a response, a response is a response, but if we can manage the stuff, this is totally avoidable. So if it can be managed while with early warning signs that kind of stuff, then I don't think we yeah, I think.

Tony A'Bear   1:00:51
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   1:01:08
That's a bit more. Yeah, I think it's the easiest route in in, in, in, in a long term solution in solving this problem you know. So thank you so much for like, yeah, just availing yourself and your, you know, knowledge. And yeah, and I mean, I at some point I will probably just ask you a couple of questions or whatever, if that's OK through.

Tony A'Bear   1:01:16
Yeah.
You're you're welcome to phone me or have another meeting. No problem. Yeah, quite happy to engage.

Slindo Mavuso   1:01:28
Emails.
Yeah. Thank you so much. Yeah. Yeah, I'll, I I guess I'll. I'll drop the e-mail and just sort of say everything I said now and then. Thank you so much again. Yeah.

Tony A'Bear   1:01:39
Yeah.
Yeah, if you if you wouldn't mind, that would be great. Yeah. Thank you.

Slindo Mavuso   1:01:45
Thank you so much. Yeah, thanks. Thanks. Yeah. I'll keep in touch as well. Yeah. Thank you a lot. Yeah. This has been very mind. Mind opening. It's been pretty parallel to what I'm seeing, but it's it's it's it's always good to sort of have people who've worked on stuff for a very, very long time.

Tony A'Bear   1:01:54
I.
Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   1:02:03
Who are actually quite passionate about it as well, you know. So yeah, thanks. Thanks. Have a have a good one.

Tony A'Bear   1:02:07
Yeah.

Slindo Mavuso   1:02:15
Yeah.
So cheers. Bye. Thanks. Thanks. Bye.

Slindo Mavuso stopped transcription
